Discussion Paper 
National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

 

 


 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

Discussion Paper 
National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 Contents 
 

INTRODUCTION 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Discussion Paper 
National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

WHAT IS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE? 

GLOBAL DEVELOPMENTS IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND INDIA 

FOCUS AREAS FOR AI INTERVENTION 

Healthcare 
Agriculture 
Education 
Smart Cities and Infrastructure 
Smart Mobility and Transportation 

KEY CHALLENGES TO ADOPTION OF AI IN INDIA 

WAY FORWARD TO HARNESS THE POWER OF AI 

RESEARCH 

SKILLING FOR THE AI AGE 

ACCELERATING ADOPTION 

ETHICS, PRIVACY, SECURITY AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 

ACTIONS FOR THE GOVERNMENT 

APPENDIX I: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE EXPLAINED 

APPENDIX II: GLOBAL COUNTRY STRATEGY REVIEW 

APPENDIX III: DATA ECOSYSTEM 

 

 

 

5 

7 

12 

16 

18 

24 
24 
30 
35 
39 
41 

46 

48 

50 

64 

71 

85 

91 

97 

101 

111 

4 

 

 

Introduction  

Discussion Paper 
National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

 #AIforAll: Technology Leadership for Inclusive Growth 

 

Artificial  Intelligence  (AI)  is  poised  to  disrupt  our  world.  With  intelligent  machines  enabling  high-level 

cognitive  processes  like  thinking,  perceiving,  learning,  problem  solving  and  decision  making,  coupled 

with advances in data collection and aggregation, analytics and computer processing power, AI presents 

opportunities  to  complement  and  supplement  human  intelligence  and  enrich  the  way  people  live  and 

work. 

India, being the fastest growing economy with the second largest population in the world, has a significant 

stake in the AI revolution. Recognising AI’s potential to transform economies and the need for India to 

strategise its approach, Hon’ble Finance Minister, in his budget speech for 2018 – 2019, mandated NITI 

Aayog to establish the National Program on AI, with a view to guiding the research and development in 

new and emerging technologies. In pursuance of the above, NITI Aayog has adopted a three-pronged 

approach  –  undertaking  exploratory  proof-of-concept  AI  projects  in  various  areas,  crafting  a  national 

strategy  for  building  a  vibrant  AI  ecosystem  in  India  and  collaborating  with  various  experts  and 

stakeholders. Since the start of this year, NITI Aayog has partnered with several leading AI technology 

players to implement AI projects in critical areas such as agriculture and health. Learnings from these 

projects, under various stages of implementation, as well as our engagement with some of the leading 

institutions and experts have given a better perspective to our task of crafting the national strategy for AI, 

which is the focus of this discussion paper. 

This strategy document is premised on the proposition that India, given its strengths and characteristics, 

has the potential to position itself among leaders on the global AI map – with a unique brand of #AIforAll. 

The approach in this paper focuses on how India can leverage the transformative technologies to ensure 

social and inclusive growth in line with the development philosophy of the government. In addition, India 

should strive to replicate these solutions in other similarly placed developing countries.  

#AIforAll will aim at enhancing and empowering human capabilities to address the challenges of access, 

affordability, shortage and inconsistency of skilled expertise; effective implementation of AI initiatives to 

evolve scalable solutions for emerging economies; and endeavors to tackle some of the global challenges 

from AI’s perspective, be it application, research, development, technology, or responsible AI. #AIforAll 

will focus on harnessing collaborations and partnerships, and aspires to ensure prosperity for all. Thus, 

#AIforAll means technology leadership in AI for achieving the greater good. 

While evolving the national strategy for AI, the underlying thrust was to identify applications with maximum 

social impact, a willingness to learn from the best of the world when it comes to the recent technology 

advancements in AI, and leveraging approaches that democratize access to and further development of 

AI. 

From  an  applications  perspective,  the  approach  is  to  identify  sectors  that  may  have  the  potential  of 

greatest externalities while adopting  AI solutions, and hence require the government to play a leading 

role in developing the implementation roadmap for AI. For example, the agriculture sector in India, which 

forms the bedrock of India’s economy, needs multi-layered technology infusion and coordination amongst 

several  stakeholders.  Efforts  from  private  sector  may  neither  be  financially  optimal  nor  efficient  on  a 

standalone  basis,  and hence  sustained  government  intervention  to  tackle the  existing  challenges  and 

constraints is needed. Hence, India’s approach to implementation of AI has to be guided by optimisation 

of social goods, rather than maximisation of topline growth. 

 

5 

 

Discussion Paper 
National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

 
From a technology perspective, the strategy is to maximise the late-movers’ advantage. Acknowledging 

that  India  is  some  distance  away  from  consistently  delivering  home  grown  pioneering  technology 

solutions in AI, adapting and innovating the technology for India’s unique needs and opportunities would 

help it in leap frogging, while simultaneously building the foundational R&D capability aimed at ensuring 

competitiveness in the long run. 

Solving  for  India,  given  the  complexity  and  multi-dimensional  aspects  of  most  of  our  economic  and 

societal challenges, can easily be extended to the rest of the emerging and developing economies. An 

integral part of India’s strategy for AI involves tackling common and complex global challenges that can 

be solved through technology intervention, and India’s scale and opportunity landscape provides the ideal 

test-bed to ensure sustainable and scalable solutions. 

The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  lay  the  ground  work  for  evolving  the  National  Strategy  for  Artificial 

Intelligence.  While  this  paper  includes  several  recommendations,  some  of  which  may  be  deemed 

disruptive,  specifics  (e.g.  execution  and  financial  implications)  have  been  consciously  avoided,  since 

wider consultations and consensus building is needed to refine these recommendations. This document 

is intended to serve as an  “essential pre-read” in building a truly transformative approach in pursuit of 

#AIforAll. 

 

 

Amitabh Kant 

CEO, NITI Aayog 

6 

 

 

 

 

 

Executive Summary 

 India’s Approach to Leadership in AI 

 

Discussion Paper 
National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

AI refers to the ability of machines to perform cognitive tasks like thinking, perceiving, learning, problem 

solving and decision making. Initially conceived as a technology that could mimic human intelligence, AI 

has  evolved  in  ways  that  far  exceed  its  original  conception.  With  incredible  advances  made  in  data 

collection, processing and computation power, intelligent systems can now be deployed to take over a 

variety  of  tasks,  enable  connectivity  and  enhance  productivity.  As  AI’s  capabilities  have  dramatically 

expanded, so have its utility in a growing number of fields. 

The  truly  transformative  nature  of  the  technology,  yet  the  nascent  stage  of  its  adoption  worldwide, 

provides India with an opportunity to define its own brand of AI leadership. #AIforAll - the brand proposed 

for India implies inclusive technology leadership, where the full potential of AI is realised in pursuance of 

the  country’s  unique  needs  and  aspirations.  The  strategy  should  strive  to  leverage  AI  for  economic 

growth, social development and inclusive growth, and finally as a “Garage” for emerging and developing 

economies. 

While AI has the potential to provide large incremental value to a wide range of sectors, adoption till date 

has been driven primarily from a commercial perspective. Technology disruptions like AI are once-in-a-

generation phenomenon, and hence large-scale adoption strategies, especially national strategies, need 

to strike a balance between narrow definitions of financial impact and the greater good. NITI Aayog has 

decided to focus on five sectors that are envisioned to benefit the most from AI in solving societal needs: 

a)  Healthcare: increased access and affordability of quality healthcare, 
b)  Agriculture: enhanced farmers’ income, increased farm productivity and reduction of wastage, 
c)  Education: improved access and quality of education, 
d)  Smart Cities and Infrastructure: efficient and connectivity for  the burgeoning urban population, 

and 

e)  Smart Mobility and Transportation: smarter and safer modes of transportation and better traffic 

and congestion problems. 

To truly reap the benefits of deploying AI at scale, the report identifies the following barriers that need to 
be addressed in order to achieve the goals of #AIforAll:  

a)  Lack of broad based expertise in research and application of AI, 

b)  Absence of enabling data ecosystems – access to intelligent data, 

c)  High resource cost and low awareness for adoption of AI, 

d)  Privacy and security, including a lack of formal regulations around anonymisation of data, and 

e)  Absence of collaborative approach to adoption and application of AI. 

Superior  research  capabilities  have  been  the  cornerstone  of  leadership  aspirations  in  emerging 

technologies  and  effectively  realising  the  growth  potential  requires  expertise  in  both  core  and  applied 

research. Despite indications of recent positive efforts in this aspect of technology, AI research in India 

is still in its infancy and requires large scale concerted and collaborative interventions.  

The paper proposes a two-tiered structure to address India’s AI research aspirations: 

a)  Centre of Research Excellence (CORE) focused on developing better understanding of existing 

core research and pushing technology frontiers through creation of new knowledge; 

 

7 

 

 

 

b) 

International Centers of Transformational AI (ICTAI) with a mandate of developing and deploying 

application-based  research.  Private  sector  collaboration  is  envisioned  to  be  a  key  aspect  of 

ICTAIs. 

The research capabilities are proposed to be complemented by an umbrella organisation responsible for 

providing  direction  to  research  efforts  through  analysis  of  socio-economic  indicators,  studying  global 

advancements,  and  encouraging  international  collaboration.  Pursuing  “moonshot  research  projects” 

through  specialised  teams,  development  of  a  dedicated  supranational  agency  to  channel  research  in 

solving big, audacious problems of AI – “CERN for AI”, and developing common computing and other 

related infrastructure for AI are other key components research suggested.  

As  technology  increasingly  disrupts  the  nature  of  jobs  and  shifts  the  benchmarks  of  technological 

aptitude, skilling and reskilling of workforce forms an integral part of our approach to adopting AI. There 

is an emergent need for reskilling the existing workforce and developing future talent in accordance with 

the  changing  needs  of  the  job  market.  This  could  be  done  via  the  adoption  of  decentralised  teaching 

mechanisms  working  in  collaboration  with  the  private  sector  and  educational  institutions  to  prescribe 

certification with value. Furthermore, promotion of job creation in new areas, like data annotation needs 

to  be  identified  and  promoted,  as  these  would  have  the  potential  of  absorbing  a  large  portion  of  the 

workforce that may find itself redundant due to increasing automation.  

Adoption of AI across the value chain viz. startups, private sector, PSUs and government entities, will 

truly  unlock  the  potential  by  creating  a  virtuous  cycle  of  supply  and  demand.  The  barriers  to  AI 

development and deployment can effectively  be addressed by  adopting the  marketplace model –  one 

that enables market discovery of not only the price but also of different approaches that are best suited 

to achieve the desired results. A three-pronged, formal marketplace could be created focusing on data 

collection and aggregation, data annotation and deployable models. There could be a common platform 

called the National AI Marketplace (NAIM). 

Furthermore, for accelerated adoption of a highly collaborative technology like AI, the government has to 

play the critical role of a catalyst in supporting partnerships, providing access to infrastructure, fostering 

innovation  through  research  and  creating  the  demand  by  seeking  solutions  for  addressing  various 

governmental needs. 

As  AI-based  solutions  permeate  the  way  we  live  and  do  business,  questions  on  ethics,  privacy  and 

security will also emerge. Most discussions on ethical considerations of AI are a derivation of the FAT 

framework (Fairness, Accountability and Transparency). A consortium of Ethics Councils at each Centre 

of  Research  Excellence  can  be  set  up  and  it  would  be  expected  that  all  COREs  adhere  to  standard 

practice while developing AI technology and products. 

Data is one of the primary drivers of AI solutions, and thus appropriate handling of data, ensuring privacy 

and security is of prime importance. Challenges include data usage without consent, risk of identification 

of  individuals  through  data,  data  selection  bias  and  the  resulting  discrimination  of  AI  models,  and 

asymmetry  in  data  aggregation.  The  paper  suggests  establishing  data  protection  frameworks  and 

sectorial regulatory frameworks, and promotion of adoption of international standards.  

In  order  for  India  to  ride  the  AI  innovation  wave,  a  robust  intellectual  property  framework  is  required. 

Despite a number of government initiatives in strengthening the IP regime, challenges remain, especially 

in respect of applying stringent and narrowly focused patent laws to AI applications  – given the unique 

nature of AI solution development. The importance of data to development of useful models is one such 

example. To tackle these issues, establishment of IP facilitation centers to help bridge the gap between 

practitioners and AI developers, and adequate training of IP granting authorities, judiciary and tribunals 

is suggested. 

 

8 

 

 

 
The AI strategy is aimed at primarily guiding an inevitable wave of change for quicker and better impact. 

The AI ecosystem is rapidly evolving and taking societies into uncharted territory. For now, we can begin 

to ask some of the big questions that each society must answer for itself: are we ready to manage data 

ethically?  How  do  we  bridge  the  digital  divide?  Which  innovations  are  worthy  of  public  funds  and 

partnerships?  Bringing  these  questions  into  the  open  is  the  most  important  step  in  ensuring  that  AI 

advances create a better society. 

There has been tremendous activity concerning AI policy in different countries over the past couple of 

years. Governments in USA, UK, France, Japan and China have released their policy and strategy papers 

relating to AI. In order to establish a leadership role, it is important for India to take the plunge and start 

by releasing a Strategy Paper to initiate the roll out  of an ambitious programme that  would ensure for 

India its rightful place in this transformational era. 

 

 

9 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

10 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 What is Artificial Intelligence? 

 A technical primer 

 

AI  might  just  be the single  largest  technology  revolution  of  our  live times,  with the  potential  to disrupt 

almost all aspects of human existence. Andrew Ng, Co-founder of Coursera and formerly head of Baidu 

AI Group / Google Brain, compares the transformational impact of AI to that of electricity 100 years back. 

With many industries aggressively investing in cognitive and AI solutions, global investments are forecast 

to achieve a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 50.1% to reach USD57.6 billion in 20211. 

AI is not a new phenomenon, with much of its theoretical and technological underpinning developed over 

the past 70 years by computer scientists such as Alan Turing, Marvin Minsky and John McCarthy. AI has 

already existed to some degree in many industries and governments. Now, thanks to virtually unlimited 

computing power and the decreasing costs of data storage, we are on the cusp of the exponential age of 

AI as organisations learn to unlock the value trapped in vast volumes of data. 

AI  is  a constellation of technologies  that enable machines to act  with higher levels  of intelligence and 

emulate  the  human  capabilities  of  sense,  comprehend  and  act.  Thus,  computer  vision  and  audio 

processing can actively perceive the world around them by acquiring and processing images, sound and 

speech. The natural language processing and inference engines can enable AI systems to analyse and 

understand the information collected. An AI system can also take action through technologies such as 

expert  systems  and  inference  engines  or  undertake  actions  in  the  physical  world.  These  human 

capabilities  are  augmented  by  the  ability  to  learn  from  experience  and  keep  adapting  over  time.  AI 

systems are finding ever-wider application to supplement these capabilities across enterprises as they 

grow in sophistication. 

Irrespective of the type of AI being used, however, every application begins with large amounts of training 

data. In the past, this kind of performance was driven by rules-based data analytics programs, statistical 

regressions, and early “expert systems.” But the explosion of powerful deep neural networks now gives 

AI something a mere program doesn’t have: the ability to do the unexpected. 

 

 

                                                      
1 Worldwide Semi-annual Cognitive Artificial Intelligence Systems Spending Guide from International Data Corp. (IDC), 2017 

12 

 

 

 

Source: 
Accenture 

 

 

Figure 1: What is Artificial Intelligence 

 

AI technology has experienced a checkered history of waves of optimism followed by disappointment and 

periods of inertia, dubbed as “AI winters”. Each previous breakthrough has only ever partly lived up to 

the hype it generated, and none has managed to kick-start the technology into the mainstream. 

Figure 2: Evolution of AI 

Source: 
Accenture 

 

 

 

The big change today is that we are in an unprecedented period of technology innovation across so many 

different fields that gives us the belief that the “AI Spring” has not only arrived but is here to stay. Key 

developments responsible for this optimism are: 

13 

 

 

 

a)  Unlimited access to computing power: The worldwide public cloud services market is projected 

to grow 21.4% in 2018 to total USD186.4 billion, up from USD153.5 billion in 2017, according to 

Gartner, Inc. The access is amplified by rapid increase in computational power.  

b)  Huge fall in cost of storing data: We are in an age where the hard drive cost per gigabyte of data 

has been falling exponentially, to the extent that we are approaching near zero marginal cost for 

storing data (down from USD500,000 a gigabyte in 1980 to 2 cents a gigabyte in 2017). 

c)  Explosion in data that is digitised: As per IDC forecasts, by 2025, the global data sphere will grow 
to 163 zettabytes (that is a trillion gigabytes)2, or ten times the 16.1ZB of data generated in 2016. 
As Barry Smyth, Professor of Computer science at University College Dublin, says: "Data is to 
AI  what  food  is  to  humans."  So,  in  a  more  digital  world,  the  exponential  growth  of  data  is 
constantly feeding AI improvements. 

Consider,  for  example,  the  vastly  increased  processing  power  that  comes  from  using  Graphics 
Processing  Units  (GPUs)  in  place  of  Central  Processing  Units  (CPUs).  Google,  in  May  2017, 
announced  that  its  Tensor  Processing  Unit  (TPU)  delivered  higher  performance-per-watt  than 
contemporary CPUs and GPUs3. When you add the decreasing cost of storage to the mix, plus the 
exponential  growth  in  data  volumes,  together  with  the  emergence  of  open  source  platforms  and 
frameworks, you have got a uniquely potent combination of technologies and capabilities. It all adds 
up to a very powerful foundation to give AI its critical mass for mainstream adoption. 

 1: Machine Learning and Deep Learning 

Machine  Learning,  a  term  coined  by  Artur  Samuel  in  1959,  meant  “the  ability  to  learn  without  being 

explicitly programmed.” Machine Learning involves the use of algorithms to parse data and learn from it, 

and making a determination or prediction as a result. Instead of hand coding software libraries with well-

defined specific instructions for a particular task, the machine gets “trained” using large amounts of data 

and algorithms, and in turn gains the capability to perform specific tasks. 

“Deep Learning is a technique for implementing Machine Learning. Deep Learning was inspired by the 

structure  and  function  of  the  brain,  specifically  the  interconnecting  of  many  neurons.  Artificial  Neural 

Networks (ANNs) are algorithms that are based on the biological structure of the brain. In ANNs, there 

are  ‘neurons’  which  have  discrete  layers  and  connections  to  other  “neurons”.  Each  layer  picks  out  a 

specific feature to learn. It’s this layering that gives deep learning its name,  depth is created  by using 

multiple layers as opposed to a single layer4.” 

 

Figure 3: AI, ML and Deep Learning 

Source: nVIDIA 

                                                      
2 Data Age 2025: “The Evolution of Data to Life-Critical whitepaper by International Data Corporation, 2017” 
3 Google: In-Datacenter Performance Analysis of a Tensor Processing Unit, 2017 
4 Medium.com: “The Difference Between Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Deep Learning” 

 

 

14 

 

 

 

For a detailed analysis of major types of Machine Learning, algorithms and use cases, please refer to 

Appendix I: Artificial Intelligence Explained. 

AI  gets  categorised  in different  ways  and  it  may  be  useful  to  understand the  various  categories,  their 

rationale and the implications. 

a)  Weak AI vs. Strong AI: Weak AI describes "simulated" thinking. That is, a system which appears 

to behave  intelligently,  but  doesn't  have  any  kind  of  consciousness  about  what  it's  doing.  For 

example, a chatbot might appear to hold a natural conversation, but it has no sense of who it is 

or  why  it's  talking  to  you.  Strong AI  describes  "actual"  thinking.  That  is,  behaving  intelligently, 

thinking  as  human  does,  with  a  conscious,  subjective  mind.  For  example,  when  two  humans 

converse, they most likely know exactly who they are, what they're doing, and why. 

b)  Narrow  AI  vs.  General  AI:  Narrow  AI  describes  an  AI  that  is  limited  to  a  single  task  or  a  set 

number of tasks. For example, the capabilities of IBM's Deep Blue, the chess playing computer 

that beat world champion Gary Kasparov in 1997, were limited to playing chess. It wouldn't have 

been able to win a game of tic-tac-toe - or even know how to play. General AI describes an AI 

which can be used to complete a wide range of tasks in a wide range of environments. As such, 

it's much closer to human intelligence. 

c)  Superintelligence: The term "superintelligence" is often used to refer to general and strong AI at 

the point at which it surpasses human intelligence, if it ever does. 

While  big  strides  have  been  made  in  Artificial  Narrow  Intelligence  –  algorithms  that  can  process 

documents, drive vehicles or beat champion chess players, no one has yet claimed the first production 

or development of General AI. The weight of expert opinion is that we are a long way off the emergence 

of General AI. 

Figure 4: Narrow AI vs. General AI 

Source: 
Accenture 

 

 

 

15 

 

 

 

 

 Global Developments in Artificial Intelligence 

Benchmarking select countries  

 

Countries  around  the  world  are  becoming  increasingly  aware  of  the  potential  economic  and  social 

benefits of developing and applying AI. For example, China and U.K. estimate that 26% and 10% of their 

GDPs  respectively  in  2030  will  be  sourced  from  AI-related  activities  and  businesses.  There has  been 

tremendous activity concerning AI policy positions and the development of an AI ecosystem in different 

countries  over  the  last  18  to  24  months  –  the  US  published  its  AI  report  in  December  2016;  France 

published the AI strategy in January 2017 followed by a detailed policy document in March 2018; Japan 

released a document in March 2017; China published the AI strategy in July 2017; and U.K. released its 

industrial strategy in November 2017.  

Infrastructural  supply  side  interventions  have  been  planned  by  various  countries  for  creating  a  larger 

ecosystem of AI  development. Creation of “data trusts”, rolling out of digital connectivity  infrastructure 

such as 5G / full fiber networks, common supercomputing facilities, fiscal incentives and creation of open 

source  software  libraries  are  some  of  the  focus  areas  of  various  governments  as  committed  in  their 

strategy papers.  

In the area of core research in AI and related technologies, universities and research institutions from the 

US, China and Japan have led the publication volume on AI research topics between 2010 and 2016. 

Universities  in  USA,  primarily  Carnegie  Mellon  University,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  and 

Stanford, took an early lead in AI research by offering new courses, establishing research facilities and 

instituting  industry  partnerships.  Off  late,  Chinese  universities,  especially  Peking  and  Tsinghua 

Universities  have caught on to the  race  by  utilising  large  scale  public  funding  and extensive research 

partnerships with private companies.  

For  building  the  future  workforce  for  AI,  countries  are  also  significantly  increasing  the  allocation  of 

resources  for  Science,  Technology,  Engineering  and  Maths  (STEM)  talent  development  through 

investment  in  universities,  mandating  new  courses  (e.g.,  AI  and  law),  and  offering schemes  to retrain 

people. For instance, U.K. has planned to build over 1,000 government supported PhD researchers by 

2025 and set up a Turing fellowship to support an initial cohort of AI fellows while China has launched a 

five-year university program to train at least 500 teachers and 5,000 students working on AI technologies.  

Governance structures for enabling all the above mandates vary across countries. Many countries have 

instituted dedicated public offices such as Ministry of AI (UAE), and Office of AI and AI Council (U.K.) 

while China and  Japan  have allowed existing  ministries  to take up  AI  implementation  in their  sectoral 

areas. Not just national governments, but even local city governments have become increasingly aware 

about the importance and potential of AI and have committed public investments.  

National governments have significantly increased public funding for AI through commitments such as 

increasing the R&D spend, setting up industrial and investment funds in AI startups, investing in network 

and infrastructure and AI-related public procurements. China, USA, France and Japan have committed 

significant public spending for AI technology development and adoption.  

These countries  are  also leveraging  different combinations  of  public-private-academia to  develop  and 

promote  AI.  Development  of  technology  parks,  and  connecting  large  corporations  with  startups  and 

16 

 

 

 

 

forming “national teams” with large private players to undertake fundamental and applied research are 

some of the public-private partnership approaches various national governments have espoused.  

AI technology development and applications are evolving rapidly with major implications for economies 

and societies. A study by EY and NASCCOM found that by 2022, around 46% of the workforce will be 

engaged  in  entirely  new  jobs  that  do  not  exist  today,  or  will  be  deployed  in  jobs  that  have  radically 

changed skillsets5. If some countries decide to wait for a few years to establish an AI strategy and put in 

place the foundations for developing the AI ecosystem, it seems unlikely that they would be able to attain 

and match up to the current momentum in the rapidly changing socio-economic environment. Therefore, 

the need of the hour is to develop a policy framework that will help set up a vibrant AI ecosystem in India.  

A detailed study of various country strategies for AI is placed in the Appendix II: Global Country Strategy 

Review.  

 

                                                      
5 Future of Jobs in India: A 2022 Perspective, 2017 

 

17 

 

 

  

 

 Artificial Intelligence and India 

Identifying priority areas for India’s efforts in Artificial Intelligence  

 

A national AI strategy needs to be premised on a framework which is adapted to  India’s unique needs 

and aspirations, while at the same time, is capable of achieving the country’s full potential of leveraging 

AI developments. Such a framework could be seen as an aggregation of the following three distinct, yet 

inter-related components: 

a)  Opportunity: the economic impact of AI for India 

b)  AI for Greater Good: social development and inclusive growth  

c)  AI  Garage  for  40%  of  the  world:  solution  provider  of  choice  for  the  emerging  and  developing 

economies (ex-China) across the globe  

Opportunity: the economic impact of Artificial Intelligence for India 

AI is emerging as a new factor of production, augmenting the traditional factors of production viz. labor, 

capital and innovation and technological changes captured 

in total factor productivity. AI has the potential to overcome 

the  physical  limitations  of  capital  and  labour,  and  open  up 

new sources of value and growth. From an economic impact 

perspective,  AI  has  the  potential  to  drive  growth  through 

enabling:  (a)  intelligent  automation  i.e.  ability  to  automate 

complex  physical  world  tasks  that  require  adaptability  and 

agility  across 

industries, 

(b) 

labour  and 

capital 

augmentation:  enabling  humans  to  focus  on  parts  of  their 

role  that  add  the  most  value,  complementing  human 

capabilities  and 

improving  capital  efficiency,  and  (c) 

innovation diffusion i.e. propelling innovations as it diffuses through the economy. AI innovations in one 

sector will have positive consequences in another, as industry sectors are interdependent based on value 

chain. Economic value is expected to be created from the new goods, services and innovations that AI 

will enable. 

Accenture, in its recent AI research reports6, provides a framework for evaluating the economic impact 

of AI for select G20 countries and estimates AI to boost India’s annual growth rate by  1.3 percentage 

points by 2035.  

 

 

 

                                                      
6 Rewire for Growth: Accelerating India’s Economic Growth with Artificial Intelligence, Accenture 

18 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5: Unlocking innovation through AI 

Source: 
Accenture 

 

AI for Greater Good: social development and inclusive growth  

Beyond just the headline numbers of economic impact, a disruptive technology such as AI needs to be 

seen from the perspective of the transformative impact it could have on the greater good – improving the 

quality  of  life  and  access  of  choice  to  a  large  section  of  the  country.  In  that  sense,  the  recent 

advancements  in  AI  seem  to  be  custom-made  for  the  unique  opportunities  and  challenges  that  India 

faces. Increased access to quality health facilities (including addressing the locational access barriers), 

inclusive financial growth for large sections of population that have hitherto been excluded from formal 

financial products, providing real-time advisory to farmers and help address unforeseen factors towards 

increasing  productivity,  building  smart  and  efficient  cities  and  infrastructure  to  meet  the  demands  of 

rapidly urbanising population are some of the examples that can be most effectively solved through the 

non-incremental advantages that a technology such as AI can provide. 

AI Garage for 40% of the world 

In addition to providing unique opportunities, India provides a perfect “playground” for enterprises and 

institutions  globally  to  develop  scalable  solutions  which  can  be  easily  implemented  in  the  rest  of  the 

developing and emerging economies. Simply put,  Solve for India means solve for 40% or more of the 

world.  An advanced  AI based solution for early diagnosis of tuberculosis (one of the top-10 causes of 

deaths worldwide), for example, could easily be rolled out to countries in South East Asia or Africa, once 

developed  and  refined  in  India.  Beyond  healthcare,  AI  technologies  in  the  other  sectors  including 

agriculture, education and mobility are set to transform the world. The commonality of issues with regard 

to the above sectors across developing countries provides the ideal use case of developing AI solutions 

that could be adapted for multiple markets. Hence, AI technologies suited for the Indian agricultural sector 

could  easily  be  customised  for  other  developing  nations  based  on  their  local  climatic  conditions. 

Education continues to be a major concern in almost all developing countries. AI technologies that are 

capable of imparting quality education to India’s linguistically diverse population could prove very useful 

in other developing nations.  

Another aspect of India’s potential as a leader in AI is it proven track record in technology solution provider 

of choice. Solved in India (or more accurately, solved by Indian IT companies) could be the model going 

forward for Artificial Intelligence as a Service (AIaaS). Indian IT companies have been pioneers in bringing 

technology products and developments as solutions  across the globe. As  AI matures and generalised 

applications become common place, its advantage India when it comes to large scale implementation. 

Furthermore,  India’s  competence  in  IT  combined  with  opportunities,  such  as  interoperability  between 

 

19 

 

 

 

multiple languages, provides the much needed impetus for finding scalable solutions for problems that 

have global implications, such as NLP.  

Artificial  Intelligence  has  the  potential  to  provide  large  incremental  value  to  a  wide  range  of  sectors 

globally, and is expected to be the key source of competitive advantage for firms.  

a)  Healthcare: Application of AI in healthcare can help address issues of high barriers to access to 

healthcare facilities, particularly in rural areas that suffer from poor connectivity and limited supply 

of healthcare professionals. This can be achieved through implementation of use cases such as 

AI  driven  diagnostics,  personalised  treatment,  early  identification  of  potential  pandemics,  and 

imaging diagnostics, among others. 

b)  Agriculture: AI holds the promise of driving a food revolution and meeting the increased demand 

for food (global need to produce 50% more food and cater to an additional 2 billion people by 2050 

as compared to today). It also has the potential to address challenges such as inadequate demand 

prediction, lack of assured irrigation, and overuse / misuse of pesticides and fertilisers. Some use 

cases include improvement in crop yield through real time advisory, advanced detection of pest 

attacks, and prediction of crop prices to inform sowing practices. 

c)  Smart  Mobility,  including  Transports  and  Logistics:  Potential  use  cases  in  this  domain  include 

autonomous fleets for ride sharing, semi-autonomous features such as driver assist, and predictive 

engine monitoring and maintenance. Other areas that AI can impact include autonomous trucking 

and delivery, and improved traffic management.  

d)  Retail: The retail sector has been one of the early adopters of AI solutions, with applications such 

as improving user experience by providing personalised suggestions, preference-based browsing 

and  image-based  product  search.  Other  use  cases  include  customer  demand  anticipation, 

improved inventory management, and efficient delivery management. 

e)  Manufacturing:  Manufacturing  industry  is  expected  to  be  one  of  the  biggest  beneficiaries  of  AI 

based  solutions,  thus  enabling  'Factory  of  the  Future'  through  flexible  and  adaptable  technical 

systems to automate processes and machinery to respond to unfamiliar or unexpected situations 

by making smart decisions. Impact areas include engineering (AI for R&D efforts), supply chain 

management  (demand  forecasting),  production  (AI  can  achieve  cost  reduction  and  increase 

efficiency),  maintenance  (predictive  maintenance  and  increased  asset  utilisation),  quality 

assurance (e.g. vision systems with machine learning algorithms to identify defects and deviations 

in product features), and in-plant logistics and warehousing. 

f)  Energy: Potential use cases in the energy sector include energy system modelling and forecasting 

to decrease unpredictability and increase efficiency in power balancing and usage. In renewable 

energy systems, AI can enable storage of energy through intelligent grids enabled by smart meters, 

and also improve the reliability and affordability of photovoltaic energy. Similar to the manufacturing 

sector, AI may also be deployed for predictive maintenance of grid infrastructure. 

g)  Smart Cities: Integration of AI in newly developed smart cities and infrastructure could also help 

meet the demands of a rapidly urbanising population and providing them with enhanced quality of 

life. Potential use cases include traffic control to reduce congestion and enhanced security through 

improved  crowd management. 

h)  Education and Skilling: AI can potentially solve for quality and access issues observed in the Indian 

education sector. Potential use cases include augmenting and enhancing the learning experience 

through personalised learning, automating and expediting administrative tasks, and predicting the 

need for student intervention to reduce dropouts or recommend vocational training. 

 

20 

 

 

 

Adoption of AI by various sectors have been influenced by, among other factors, technical and regulatory 

challenges,  but  commercial  implications  has  been  the  biggest  determinant. While  technical  feasibility, 

availability of structured data, regulatory barriers, privacy considerations, ethical issues, preference for 

human relationship have all played their roles in determining the readiness of a sector for large scale AI 

adoption;  compelling  business  use  cases  (e.g.  improved  efficiency,  accuracy,  speed,  forecasting  and 

accurate decision making) that lead to direct impact on revenue and profitability have been the biggest 

driver for companies to pursue accelerated adoption of AI. As illustrated in McKinsey Global Institute’s AI 

adoption and use survey, sectors leading the AI adoption today also intend to grow their investment in AI 

the most, thus further reinforcing the varying degrees of AI adoption across sectors. 

Figure 6: Current AI adoption and future AI investments by sector 

Source: 
McKinsey 
Global 
Institute AI 
adoption and 
use survey 

 

It comes as no surprise that Banking and Financial Services sector has been one of the leading sectors 

globally  when  it  comes  to  AI  adoption,  and  India  has  also  seen  a  steep  increase  in  AI  based 

implementation in recent times. Existing and potential use of Artificial Intelligence in this sector include 

improved  customer  interaction  through  personalised  engagement,  virtual  customer  assistance,  and 

chatbots;  improved  processes  through  deployment  of  intelligent  automation  in  rule  based  back-office 

operations; development of credit scores through analysis of bank history or social media data; and fraud 

analytics  for  proactive  monitoring  and  prevention  of  various  instances  of  fraud,  money  laundering, 

malpractice,  and  the  prediction  of  potential  risks.  AI  in  this  sector  has  also  been  employed  in  wealth 

management viz. robo-advisory, algorithmic trading and automated transactions. 

Similarly, manufacturing sector, primarily automotive and assembly, has been one of the first sectors to 

implement  advanced  robotics  at  scale.  The  manufacturing  sector  in  India  hasn’t  been  far  behind,  as 
reflected  in  a  recent  study  by  BCG,  where  India  was  ranked  3rd  in  the  world  in  AI  implementation  in 

 

21 

 

 

 

manufacturing, ahead of nations such as Germany, with 19% of companies in the sector already using 

AI to a significant extent7. 

These trends have also been reflected in the nature of investment in research in India, with private sector 

initiatives  such  as  the  Robert  Bosch  Centre  for  Data  Science  and  Artificial  Intelligence  (RBC-DSAI), 

choosing  to  focus  their  efforts  in  applied  research  on  sectors  such  as  manufacturing  analytics  and 

financial analytics. 

Figure 6 also reveals that sectors like Healthcare and Education have quite a lot of ground to cover as 

far  as  AI  adoption  is  concerned.  Healthcare,  despite  being  one  of  the  hottest  areas  of  AI  startup 

investments  (Appendix  IV:  What  Do  the  Markets  Say),  is  tricky,  especially  in  the  Indian  context. 

Agriculture  doesn’t  even  feature  in  the  analysis  above. Another  analysis  by  McKinsey  Global  Institute 

indicates that potential value of AI for agriculture was in the bottom tercile of 19 sectors evaluated 8, and 

could  be  a possible explanation for diminished private sector led AI adoption in  agriculture. In sectors 

such as these, externalities from adoption of AI far outweigh the economic returns realised by  private 

initiatives, and hence the role of government becomes pivotal in ensuring large scale AI intervention.  

NITI Aayog has evaluated various sectors that will be impacted by AI and has taken a conscious decision 

to focus on a select set of sectors where only private sector led initiatives will not lead to achieving desired 

societal outcomes. In addition to Healthcare and Agriculture, focus sectors include Education (preparing 

tomorrow’s  generation  to  leverage  the  global  AI  revolution  to  India’s  advantage),  Smart  Cities  and 

Infrastructure  (solving  for  India’s  rapidly  urbanising  population)  and  Smart  Mobility  and  Transportation 

(solving for challenges congestion, pollution, high rates of road accidents leading to economic inefficiency 

and enormous human cost). 

An unrelated but interesting paradigm for AI application is the “AI + X” approach. Despite its vast potential, 

the capabilities of AI today are limited to tasks for which it has been specifically trained, and are still many 

years from achieving human like consciousness. AI today should thus be regarded as an enhancement, 

or  enabler  of  increased  efficiency  in  previously  existing processes,  rather  than  capable  of  a complete 

overhaul  of  traditional  tasks.  Deployment  can  be  viewed  through  the  paradigm  of  “take  an  existing 

process, and add AI” or “AI + X”; where “X” can range from tasks such as driving a car, where AI can 

provide incremental value through improved routing and energy management, to act of sowing seeds, 

where AI can help inform decision making and improve productivity.  

Similar to the effects of electricity, AI can increasingly be seen as an intelligent, additive utility that can 

be deployed at will, but remain largely invisible to the tasks performer. This vision is perhaps best put by 

author Kevin Kelley:  

“There is almost nothing we can think of that cannot be made new, different, or more valuable by infusing 

it with some extra IQ. In fact, the business plans for the next 10,000 startups are easy to forecast: Take 

X and add AI” . 

In applying this paradigm to the development of a national strategy, it is thus important to consider the 

challenges faced by individual sectors, or various manifestations of “X” to best identify the incremental 

value  that  AI  can  provide.  The  paradigm  also  cements  the  need  for  collaboration  with  sectorial 

stakeholders in the application of the technology. The paradigm provides a useful framework to analyse 

what is possible in terms of technology intervention today.

                                                      
7 BCG “AI in the Factory of the Future” 
8 McKinsey Global Institute “Notes From The AI Frontier: Insights From Hundreds Of Use Cases” 

22 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

Focus areas for AI intervention 

 Sectoral deep dives 

 

Healthcare  

Healthcare  is  one  of  the  most  dynamic,  yet  challenging,  sectors  in  India,  and  is  expected  to  grow  to 
USD280 billion by 2020, at a CAGR of upwards of 16%, from the current ~USD100 billion9.  

Yet, it faces major challenges of quality, accessibility and affordability for a large section of the population: 

a)  Shortage  of  qualified  healthcare  professionals  and  services  like  qualified  doctors,  nurses, 

technicians  and  infrastructure:  as  evidenced  in  0.76  doctors  and  2.09  nurses  per  1,000 

population  (as  compared  to  WHO  recommendations  of  1  doctor  and  2.5  nurses  per  1,000 

population  respectively)  and  1.3  hospital  beds  per  1,000  population  as  compared  to  WHO 
recommended 3.5 hospital beds per 1,000 population10. 

b)  Non-uniform accessibility to healthcare across the country with physical access continuing to be 

the major barrier to both preventive and curative health services, and glaring disparity between 

rural and urban India.  

Figure 7: Accessibility of Healthcare across India 

                                                      
9 FICCI-KPMG study 
10 WHO website, PwC analysis 

 

24 

 

 

Source: 
PwC 
Analysis, 
World Bank 
data (2017) 

 

 

 

With most of the private facilities concentrated in and around tier 1 and tier 2 cities, patients have to travel 

substantial distances for basic and advanced healthcare services. ( 2: What TMH’s Cancer heat map 

tells us about the availability of healthcare in India?)  

The problem is further accentuated by lack of consistent quality in healthcare across India, most of the 

services provided is individual driven rather than institution driven, and less than 2% of hospitals in India 

are accredited. 

 2: What TMH’s Cancer heat map tells us about the availability of 

healthcare in India? 

Tata Memorial Hospital, one of the leading cancer hospitals in India, registered more than 67,000 new 

registrations for cancer treatment in 2015. While the hospital is located in Mumbai, less than 23% of the 

new  patients  were  geographically  based  in  Maharashtra,  with  a  whopping  21.7%  of  patients  traveling 

from the states of UP, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal to TMH.  

Figure 8: Geographic location of TMH cancer patients

That these patients  had to  travel more than 1,800 km, on  an  average, to avail cancer treatment is  an 

unfortunate tale of lack of access to quality healthcare. In addition to battling a potentially life threatening 

disease, the patients are saddled by the stress and financial implications of traveling long way away from 

home. While the data is not available to such an effect, it wouldn’t be surprising to find that most of these 

patients choose to travel to TMH when cancer has developed to an advanced stage, thus further reducing 

 

the chances of successful cure and treatment. 

Credit: Tata Memorial Centre 

 

 

25 

 

 

 

c)  Affordability  remains  a  problem  with  private  expenditure  accounting  for  ~70%  of  healthcare 

expenses, of which ~62% is out-of-pocket expenditure, probably one of the highest in the world. 

Significant portion of hospital costs in both rural (~47%) and urban India (~31%) are financed by 

loans and sale of assets. Poor and marginalised are hit the most, and as per the Government 

estimates,  a  sizeable  part  of  the  population  (~63  million)  are  faced  with  poverty  every  year 

because of their healthcare expenditure11. 

d)  Reactive approach to essential healthcare largely due to lack of awareness, access to services 

and behavioral factors implies that majority of patients approach a hospital / physician only when 

a disease has reached an  advanced stage, thus increasing the cost of care  and  reducing the 

chances of recovery.  

The  Government  of  India  has  been  making  a  series  of  large  scale  interventions  to  address  India’s 

healthcare challenges, viz. transformation of 1.5 lakh Health and Wellness Centers, developing district 

hospitals  to  cater  to  long-term  care  for  non-communicable  diseases,  Ayushman  Bharat  Mission, 

promoting e-Health etc. 

 3: Government of India’s push for Universal Healthcare Coverage 

The  Government  of  India,  through  its  recent  policy  interventions,  has  shown  a  bold  commitment  to 

achieve  Universal  Health  Coverage  and  increased  access  to  comprehensive  primary  health  care. 

Through  the  Ayushman  Bharat  programme  announced  in  Union  Budget  2018,  probably  the  world’s 

largest government funded health care programme, the  Government of India has embarked on a path 

breaking journey to ensure the affordability and accessibility of healthcare in India. The Ayushman Bharat 

– National Health Protection Mission (AB  – NHPM) aims to provide insurance cover of INR 5 lakh per 

family per year for secondary and tertiary care hospitalisation. Ayushman Bharat is targeted at more than 

10 crore families (approximately 50 crore beneficiaries / ~40% of India’s population) belonging to the poor 

and vulnerable sections based on the SECC database, and doesn’t impose any limitations on family size 

or age limit for the beneficiaries to avail benefits. The benefits package covers most medical and surgical 

conditions  with  minimal  exclusions,  covers  pre  and  post  hospitalisation  expenses,  and  covers  all  pre-

existing conditions from day one – thus simplifying availing requisite healthcare by the beneficiaries. The 

benefits  of  the  Mission  will  be  available  at  public  hospitals  as  well  as  empaneled  private  health  care 

facilities.  

The Union Budget 2018 also included a commitment of ~INR1,200 crore for Health and Wellness Centres 

(HWC), which will lay the foundation for  India’s health system as envisioned in the National Health Policy 

2017. These HWCs, to be set up by transforming 1.5 lakh Health Sub Centres from 2018 to 2022, are 

aimed  at  shifting  primary  healthcare  from  selective  (reproductive  and  child  health  /  few  infectious 

diseases)  to  comprehensive  (including  screening  and  management  of  NCDs;  screening  and  basic 

management of mental health ailments; care for common ophthalmic and ENT problems; basic dental 

health care; geriatric and palliative health care, and trauma care and emergency care). NCDs account 

for ~60% of mortality in India, 55% of which is premature. NCDs are predominantly chronic conditions 

and impact the poor most adversely,  given the  high costs of treatment involved. Prevention  and early 

detection are therefore of the essence in reducing the disease burden attributable to these conditions as 

well as ensuring long-term follow-up and management of symptoms for patients. The HWCs, under the 

new implementation plan, will provide 12 basic healthcare services, expanding from the current package 

of 6 services. Crucially, these centres will provide preventive services to improve healthy behaviours for 

                                                      
11 National Health Policy 2015 Draft 

 

26 

 

 

 

family health and control the incidence of communicable and non-communicable diseases among the 
population  covered  by  HWCs.  A  key  component  of  HWCs  will  be  universal  screening  for  NCDs. 
Screening for five NCDs and associated risk factors has been prioritised given the high burden of disease 
associated with them. These include  hypertension, diabetes, as well as  three common cancers - oral, 
breast and cervical. Screening for other conditions such as Chronic Obstructive Disease will be added 
subsequently.  The  HWCs  will  be  operated  by  a  mid-level  health  service  provider,    auxiliary  nurse 
midwives, accredited social health activists and a male health worker responsible for comprehensive 
primary health care services for a population of about 5,000. 

Figure 9: Features of HWC 

1

2

3

4

5

6

Care in pregnancy 
and child-birth

Neonatal, infant health 
care services

Childhood and 
adolescent healthcare

Family planning / 
reproductive healthcare

Communicable diseases 
(TB, Malaria etc.)

Screening, prevention 
and control of NCDs

Equipped with consulting spaces and 
wellness rooms

Telemedicine facilities and point of 
care diagnostics

Comprehensive 

primary health care 

through HWCs

Expansion to 12 
basic services, 
integration with 
AYUSH, health 

promotion

Robust IT 

system, MLHP 
and payment 

reforms

7

8

9

10

11

12

Common ophthalmic 
and ENT care

Out-patient care for acute 
simple illnesses /  ailments

Basic oral healthcare

Manageable emergency 
medical services

Screening / management 
of mental health ailments

Elderly and palliative 
health care services

Hub and spoke model for connecting 
HWCs with PHCs

Drug storage and dispensation, 
waiting area for 30+ people

 

The NHPM and HWC, in unison, are aimed at holistically addressing the health needs of the population, 
including health promotion and disease prevention as well as the delivery of primary, secondary and 
tertiary services.  

In addition, the government aims at leveraging technology to improve healthcare facilities through the: 

a) the National eHealth Authority (NeHA) which will strategise eHealth adoption, define  standards and a 
framework for the health sector, put in place  electronic health exchanges for interoperability, 

b) the Integrated Health Information Program (IHIP) to provide EHR to all citizens of India and provide 
interoperability to existing EHR/EMRs, 

c) the Electronic Health Record Standards for India 

Despite  the  obvious  economic  potential,  the  healthcare  sector  in  India  remains  multi-layered  and 
complex, and is ripe for disruption from emerging technologies at multiple levels. It is probably the most 
intuitive  and  obvious  use  case  primed  for  intervention  by  AI  driven  solutions,  as  evidenced  by  the 
increasing activity from large corporates and startups alike in developing AI focused healthcare solutions. 
Adoption of AI for healthcare applications is expected to see an exponential increase in next few years. 
The healthcare market globally driven by AI is expected to register an explosive CAGR of 40% through 

27 

 

 

 

 

 

2021, and what was a USD600 million market in 2014 is expected to reach USD6.6 billion by 202112. The 

increased  advances  in  technology,  and  interest  and  activity  from  innovators,  provides  opportunity  for 

India to solve some of its long existing challenges in providing appropriate healthcare to a large section 

of its population. AI combined with robotics and Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) could potentially be the 

new nervous system for healthcare, presenting solutions to address healthcare problems and helping the 

government in meeting the above objectives. 

 

 

Source: 
PWC, “No 
longer 
science 
fiction,  
AI and 
robotics are 
transforming 
healthcare” 

Figure 10: Potential use cases of AI in Healthcare 

 

AI solutions can augment the scarce personnel and lab facilities; help overcome the barriers to access 

and solve the accessibility problem; through early detection, diagnostic, decision making and treatment, 

cater to a large part of India.  

Cancer screening and treatment is an area where AI provides tremendous scope for targeted large scale 

interventions. India sees an incidence of more than 1 million new cases of cancer every year, and early 

detection and management can be crucial in an optimum cancer treatment regimen across the country. 

NITI  Aayog  is  in  an  advanced  stage  for  launching  a  programme  to  develop  a  national  repository  of 

annotated  and  curated  pathology  images.  Another  related  project  under  discussions  is  an  Imaging 

Biobank for Cancer. 

 4: AI for India’s cancer woes 

Cancer screening and treatment is an area where AI provides tremendous scope for targeted large scale 

interventions. India sees an incidence of more than 1 million new cases of cancer every year, a number 

that  is  likely  to  increase  given  the  increasing  age  of  Indian  population  and  lifestyle  changes.  Early 

detection and management can be crucial in an optimum cancer treatment regimen across the country. 

Good quality pathology service is the essential building block of cancer care, which unfortunately is not 

easily available outside select Indian cities. For an annual incidence of more than 1 million new cancer 

diagnosis every  year, India has barely  2,000 pathologists experienced  in oncology,  and less than 500 

                                                      
12 Frost & Sullivan, “From $600 M to $6 Billion, Artificial Intelligence Systems Poised for Dramatic Market Expansion in 
Healthcare” 

 

28 

 

 

 

pathologists who could be considered an expert oncopathologist. Machine learning solutions aimed at 

assisting  a  general  pathologist  in  making  quality  diagnosis  can  very  well  plug  this  gap  in  providing 

essential  healthcare.  An  essential  pre-requisite  in  implementation  of  such  a  solution  is  availability  of 

quality annotated pathology datasets. NITI Aayog is in an advanced stage for launching a programme to 

develop  a national repository of annotated and curated pathology  images. The components of such a 

repository  include  a  move  towards  “Digital  Pathology”,  which  entails  all  glass  slides  generated  being 

scanned  at  high  resolution  and  magnification,  followed  by  accurate,  precise  and  comprehensive 

annotation of the scanned images using various data sources & levels of clinical & pathological (gross 

pathology, histopathology and molecular) information available from day-to-day patient care.  

Another  related  project  under  discussions  is  an  Imaging  Biobank  for  Cancer.  Human  cancers  exhibit 

strong phenotypic differences that may be visualised noninvasively by expert radiologists (using imaging 

modalities). Recent literature suggests that certain image based features may correlate to molecular and 

clinical features like known mutations (KRAS, EGFR, etc.), receptor status, prognostic power, intra-tumor 

heterogeneity, gene expression patterns, etc. Reports have shown an association between radiographic 

imaging  phenotypes  and  tumor  stage,  metabolism,  hypoxia,  angiogenesis  and  the  underlying  gene 

and/or protein expression profiles. These correlations, if rigorously established, may have a huge clinical 

impact  as  imaging  is  routinely  used  in  clinical  practice.  Moreover,  this  provides  an  unprecedented 

opportunity  to  use  artificial  intelligence  to  improve  decision-support  in  cancer  treatment  at  low  cost 

especially  in  countries  like  India.  AI  based  Radiomics  is  an  emerging  field  that  refers  to  the 

comprehensive quantification of tumor phenotypes by applying a large number of quantitative imaging 

features.  It  has  resulted  in  improvement  to  existing  biomarker  signature  panels  by  adding  imaging 

features. 

Credit: Tata Memorial Centre for developing the concepts for Digital Pathology and Imaging Biobank 

NITI  Aayog  is  working  with  Microsoft  and  Forus  Health  to  roll  out  a  technology  for  early  detection  of 

diabetic retinopathy as a pilot project. 3Nethra, developed by Forus Health, is a portable device that can 

screen for common eye problem. Integrating AI capabilities to this device using Microsoft’s retinal imaging 

APIs  enables operators of 3Nethra device to get AI-powered insights even when they are working at eye 

checkup camps in remote areas with nil or intermittent connectivity to the cloud. The resultant technology 

solution also solves for quality issues with image capture and systems checks in place to evaluate the 

usability of the image captured.  

AI based healthcare solutions can also help in making healthcare services more proactive – moving from 

“sick” care to true “health” care, with emphasis on preventive techniques. 

 

29 

 

 

 

 

Agriculture 

 

While India has come a long way from being categorised as purely an agrarian economy, agriculture and 

allied  sector  still  accounts  for  49%  of  India’s  workforce,  16%  of  the  country’s  gross  domestic  product 

(GDP)13, and ensures food security to roughly 1.3 billion people.  

Agriculture and allied sector is critical to India’s growth story. To achieve and maintain an annual growth 

rate of 8 –10% for the Indian economy, agriculture sector must grow 4% or higher rate. The Government 

of India has recently prioritised Doubling Farmers’ Income as a National Agenda; putting considerable 

focus  on  supply  chain  perspectives  in  agriculture  and  market  development  in  addition  to  productivity 

augmentation. 

Despite  making  impressive  progress  and  receiving  government  attention,  the  sector  continues  to  be 

dependent on unpredictable variables, has weak supply chain and low productivity.  

India  has  not  been  able  to  completely  remove  its  exploitative  dependence  on  resource  intensive 

agricultural practices. Degradation of land, reduction in soil fertility, increased dependence on inorganic 

fertilizers for higher production, rapidly dropping water tables and emerging pest resistance are some of 

the  several  manifestations  of  India’s  unsustainable  agricultural  practices.  As  global  climate  becomes 

more vulnerable and unpredictable, dependence on unsustainable and resource intensive agriculture will 

only heighten the risks of food scarcity and agricultural distress. 

The sector suffers from poor resource utilisation, with the production quantum and productivity still being 

quite low. For example, yield of cereals, comprising a major share of food grain production, in  terms of 

magnitude  is  significantly  lower  than  that  of  China  and  the  USA.  Technology  adoption  and  efficient 

resource usage in these two countries are far higher, thus resulting in higher yields. 

Similarly, use of water in agriculture continues to be high and sub-optimal. The practice of growing water 

intensive crops, and inefficient water management, makes India a net exporter of water and puts India’s 

long run  agronomic  sustainability  in question.  Despite  having just  one-third of  the  gross  cropped area 

under irrigation, agriculture consumes 89% of our extracted groundwater. 

Figure 11: Comparison of yield and water footprint 

Source: 
World Bank 
and 
UNSECO-
IHE Report 
on Water 
Footprint 
2010 

 

Agrarian distress in India has increased over time due to a multiplicity of factors. Fluctuating agricultural 

growth rate, globalised value chains leading to variability in commodity prices, unpredictable changes in 

 

                                                      
13 Economic Survey 2018 

30 

 

 

 

monsoon rainfall over years and structurally inefficient domestic agricultural markets are just some of the 

reasons  for  income  variability  of  farmers.  Various  National  Sample  Survey  rounds  have  shown  the 

reduction in proportion of value share of crops to overall agricultural value from 78% to 69%  since the 

Green Revolution14. Thus income disparity between a farmer and non-agricultural worker has increased 

over the years.15 

Figure 12: Income disparity 

Source: 
Doubling 
Farmers 
Income 
Committee 
Estimates 

 

On the market side, non-existent functional end-to-end agriculture value chains have caused the price 

realisation  for  farmers  to remain low.  Access  to,  and  timely  availability  of  services,  across  agricultural 

value chain at the farmers’ end thus becomes a challenge. At present, there is no functional mechanism 

to track the capacity of storage facilities available to the farmer. Value chain is not integrated through its 

entire  length  –  procurement  to  market,  including  ICT,  and  banking  services.  The  following  figure 

effectively captures the present scenario. 

Figure 13: Agri-Commodity value chain in India 

                                                      
14 Doubling Farmers Income Committee Estimates 
15 Chand, R., R. Saxena and S. Rana; Estimates and analysis of farm income in India (2015) 

 

 

31 

 

 

 

AI  will  have  significant  global  impact  on  agricultural  productivity  at  all  levels  of  the  value  chain.  

An estimate by Markets and Markets Research valued AI in agriculture to be USD432 million in 2016 and 

expects it to grow at the rate of 22.5% CAGR to be valued at USD2.6 billion by 202516. 

According to CB Insights, agricultural tech startups have raised over USD800million in the last 5 years. 

Deals for startups using robotics and machine learning to solve problems in agriculture started gaining 

momentum in 2014, in line with the rising interest in AI across multiple industries like healthcare, finance, 

and commerce. From analysing millions of satellite images to finding healthy strains of plant microbiome, 

these startups have raised over USD500 million to bring AI and robotics to agriculture. 

Globally, digital and AI technologies are helping solve pressing issues across the agriculture value chain. 

The relative role of each technology in creating impact is dependent on the nature of the work, and the 

issues at hand. India has ~30 million farmers who own smartphones, which is expected to grow 3 times 

by 2020 and 315 million rural Indians will be using internet by 202017. An Accenture study says – digital 

farming and connected farm services can impact 70 million Indian farmers in 2020, adding USD9 billion 

to farmer incomes. These are not futuristic scenarios, they are in play today, enabled by a vast digital 

ecosystem which includes traditional Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM), software and services 

companies, cloud providers, open source platforms, startups, R&D institutions and others. Future growth 

is interdependent on the close partnership among these players. 

Figure 14: Ecosystem crucial for benefits of Precision Agriculture 

Source: 
Accenture 
Research 

 

 

In  2016,  approximately  50  Indian  agricultural,  technology  based  startups  (‘AgTech’)  raised  USD313 

million18.  For  the  first  time,  this  sector  is  seeing  widespread  participation  by  startups.  Intello  Labs,  for 

example, uses image-recognition software to monitor crops and predict farm yields. Aibono uses agri-

data science and AI to provide solutions to stabilise crop yields. Trithi Robotics uses drone technology to 

allow farmers to monitor crops in real time and provide precise analysis of their soil. SatSure, a  startup 

                                                      
16 MarketsAndMarkets 
17 Forbes.com “For India's Farmers It's Agtech Startups, Not Government, That Is Key” 
18 Agfunder.com 

32 

 

 

 

with roots in India, uses ML techniques to assess images of farms and predict economic value of their 

future yield.  

Use of AI and related technologies have the potential to impact productivity and efficiency at all of the 

above stages of the agricultural value chain. 

  Soil health monitoring and restoration: Image recognition and deep learning models have enabled 

distributed soil  health monitoring  without  the  need  of  laboratory  testing  infrastructure.  AI  solutions 

integrated with data signals from remote satellites, as well as local image capture in the farm, have 

made it possible for farmers to take immediate actions to restore soil health. 

 

 5: Application for soil care 

Berlin-based agricultural tech startup PEAT has developed a deep learning application called Plantix that 

reportedly identifies potential defects and nutrient deficiencies in the soil. The analysis is conducted by 

software algorithms which correlate particular foliage patterns with certain soil defects, plant pests and 

diseases. The image recognition app identifies possible defects through images captured by the user’s 

smartphone  camera.  Users  are  then provided  with soil  restoration  techniques,  tips  and other  possible 

solutions. 

  Crop health monitoring and providing real time action advisories to farmers: The Indian agriculture 

sector is vulnerable to climate change due to being rain dependent. Varying weather patterns such 

as  increase  in  temperature,  changes  in  precipitation  levels,  and  ground  water  density,  can  affect 

farmers especially in the rainfed areas of the country. AI can be used to predict advisories for sowing, 

pest  control,  input  control  can  help  in  ensuring  increased  income  and  providing  stability  for  the 

agricultural community. For example, many agronomic factors (such as vegetation health and soil 

moisture) can be monitored up to the farm level through remote sensing. Using remote sensed data, 

high  resolution  weather  data,  AI  technologies,  and  AI  platform,  it  is  possible  to  monitor  crops 

holistically and provide additional insights to the extension workers/farmers for their farms as & when 

required. 

 

 

Increasing  efficiency  of  farm  mechanisation:  Image  classification  tools  combined  with  remote  and 

local sensed data can bring a revolutionary change in utilisation and efficiency of farm machinery, in 

areas  of  weed  removal,  early  disease  identification,  produce  harvesting  and  grading.  Horticultural 

practices require a lot of monitoring at all levels of plant growth and AI tools provide round the clock 

monitoring of these high value products.  

 

 6: AI sowing app 

Microsoft  in  collaboration  with  ICRISAT,  developed  an  AI  Sowing  App  powered  by  Microsoft  Cortana 

Intelligence  Suite  including  Machine  Learning  and  Power  BI.  The  app  sends  sowing  advisories  to 

participating farmers on the optimal date to sow. The best part  – the farmers don’t need to install  any 

sensors in their fields or incur any capital expenditure. All they needed was a feature phone capable of 

receiving  text  messages.  The  advisories  contained  essential  information  including  the  optimal  sowing 

date, soil test based fertilizer application, farm yard manure application, seed treatment, optimum sowing 

depth, and more. In tandem with the app, a personalised village advisory dashboard provided important 

 

33 

 

 

 

insights into soil health, recommended fertilizer, and seven-day weather forecasts. In 2017, the program 

was expanded to touch more than 3,000 farmers across the states of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka 

during the Kharif crop cycle (rainy season) for a host of crops including groundnut, ragi, maize, rice and 

cotton, among others. The increase in yield ranged from 10% to 30% across crops. 

 7: AI for herbicide optimisation 

Blue River Technology has designed and integrated computer vision and machine learning  technology 

that  enables  farmers  to  reduce  the  use  of  herbicides  by  spraying  only  where  weeds  are  present, 

optimising the use of inputs in farming – a key objective of precision agriculture. 

 

Increasing the share of price realisation to producers: Current low levels of price realisation to farmers 

(as  low  as  20%  in  fruits  and  vegetables19)  are  primarily  due  to  ineffective  price  discovery  and 

dissemination mechanisms, supply chain intermediary inefficiency and local regulations. Predictive 

analytics  using  AI  tools  can bring  more  accurate supply  and demand information  to farmers,  thus 

reducing  information  asymmetry  between  farmers  and  intermediaries.  As  commodity  prices  are 

interlinked  globally,  big data analysis  becomes  imperative. Data  from  e-NAM, Agricultural  Census 

(with data on over 138 million operational holdings), AGMARKET and over 110 million Soil Health 

Samples provide the volumes required for any predictive modelling.  

 

 8: AI for Precision Farming 

NITI Aayog and IBM have partnered to develop a crop yield prediction model using AI to provide real time 

advisory to farmers. IBM’s AI model for predictive insights to improve crop productivity, soil yield, control 

agricultural inputs and early warning on pest/disease outbreak will use data from remote sensing (ISRO), 

soil health cards, IMD’s  weather prediction and soil moisture/temperature, crop phenology  etc. to give 

accurate prescriptions to farmers. The project is being implemented in 10 Aspirational Districts across 

the States of Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. 

 

                                                      
19 DFI Committee Report 

34 

 

 

 

 

 

Education  

 

An  effective  education  sector  has  the  ability  to  transform  a  country  through  development  of  human 

resources and increased productivity. In the context of emerging countries particularly, levels of education 

and literacy of the population play an important role in development and overall transition to an advanced 

economy.  

In  India,  the  importance  of  a  developed  education  sector  is  amplified  by  a  large  youth  population. 

Estimates indicate that currently over half the population of the country is below the age of 25. As the 

adoption of digital means of gathering data increases, it is important that these methods are effectively 

leveraged to deliver improved education and teaching. 

The adoption of technology in education is improving, though not at the pace required. It is estimated that 

schools globally spent nearly USD160 billion on education technology, or ‘EdTech’, in 2016, and forecast 

spending  to  grow  17%  annually  through  2020.  Private  investment  in  educational  technology,  broadly 

defined as the use of computers or other technology to enhance teaching, grew 32% annually from 2011 

through 2015, rising to  USD4.5  billion  globally.  Adoption  of  new  technologies  is  still  lacking,  however, 

often attributed to unwillingness of teachers and students to adopt technology.   

School education in India has seen substantial progress in recent decades, with efforts at both the Central 

and State levels, and substantive gains in enrolment have been achieved – Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) 

is 97% at elementary level and 80% at secondary level, as per recent figures. However, low retention 

rates and poor learning outcomes mar the impact of gains in enrolment. 

a)  Low retention rates: Enrolment of children is of little use if children are not retained in the schooling 

system. Retention rate of 70.7% at elementary level indicates that one-third of enrolled children drop 

out before completing Class 8. Retention rate at secondary level is also poor at 57.4%. Low quality 

of education is one of the causes of poor retention. 

 

b)  Poor  learning  outcomes:  There is  increasing concern  about  the  poor  learning  levels  of  children  in 

school, and a new National Achievement Survey (NAS) was recently conducted in November 2017. 

Previous rounds of NAS results provide an insight into longitudinal performance over time – average 

performance of States / UTs on previous rounds showed that over 60% of Class 5 students scored 

below 50% across subjects; and for majority of the 31 States / UTs tested, performance significantly 

deteriorated in NAS Cycle-4 versus Cycle-3. Assessments from the perspective of basic foundational 

skills also indicate poor learning outcomes – in rural areas, only 47.8% of Class 5 children could read 

Class 2 level text and only 26% could do Class-5-level arithmetic. 

The above scenario is a consequence of a complex interplay of factors that pose challenges to improving 

the quality of education: 

a)  Multi-grade  and  multi-level  classrooms:  For  a  large  proportion  of  schools,  especially  in  small  or 

remote  villages,  it  is  not  viable  to  have  separate  classrooms  and  teachers  for  different  grades  / 

classes.  Consequently,  the  teacher  is  faced  with  a  heterogenous  group  of  children  in  the  same 

classroom, with wide variations in their classes, ages, abilities and learning levels. This large variation 

poses a huge challenge to the teacher and is a common cause of poor teaching-learning, thus leading 

to poor learning outcomes. 

c)  Lack  of  interactive  pedagogy  and  ineffective  remedial  instruction:  Teaching-learning  processes  in 

most classrooms are highly rote-based and non-interactive. Remedial instruction, where conducted, 

typically lacks customisation to the child’s learning level, abilities, and pace of learning.  

35 

 

 

 

 

 

 

d) 

Inadequate attention / action for likely drop-outs: Several children may be at risk of dropout due to 

various  factors,  such  as  inadequate  school  infrastructure,  poor  teachers,  poor  school  readiness, 

language barriers, large learning gaps with respect to grade level, family circumstances (e.g. migrant 

families), poor nutritional or health status, etc.  

e)  Large  teacher  vacancies  due  to  uneven  distribution  across  locations:  Large  number  of  teacher 

vacancies are mostly not due to an overall shortage of teachers in a State – instead, they are due to 

uneven distribution across different geographical areas within the State. For instance, recent figures 

for  Uttar  Pradesh  revealed  1.74  lakh  teacher  vacancies  at  elementary  school  level,  but  a 

simultaneous surplus of 0.66 lakh teachers across the state. 

 

 

f)  Professional development courses / training do not cater to real needs and have poor coverage 

Existing  teacher  training  is  typically  a  generic  kind  of  an  exercise.  It  is  not  linked  to  the  specific 
weaknesses / requirements of a teacher – for instance, a teacher with poor arithmetic understanding 
requires corresponding training to clarify  arithmetic concepts. Consequently, most teacher training 
exercises end up as wasted public expenditure, with little or no benefit to the teacher and her / his 
students.  Similar 
training  of  other  staff  such  as  school 
headmasters/principals. The coverage of existing training programs is also extremely low, typically 
less than 20% annually. 

issues  exist  with  respect 

to 

g)  Low adoption of existing technologies: A recent survey found that level of adoption of technology in 

schools is lacking, and can be largely attributed to lack of teacher training, despite provision of the 

ICT infrastructure. While 83% of the teachers surveyed use computers, the use is limited primarily to 

audio  /  visual  display,  or  student  practice.  A  meagre  41%  and  27%  use  technology  for  tracking 

student data and participating in forums respectively. This trend is even more pronounced in the low 

fee school segment surveyed20. Another trend observed is that trained teachers are much more likely 

to  use  technology  in  the  classroom.  88%  of  trained  teachers  reported  making  use  of  available 

computers as compared to only 53% of untrained teachers. Trained teachers were found to be nearly 

twice  as  likely  to  report  using  technology  for  communication  purposes  and  for  online  forum 

participation21. 

 

According  to  EdTechXGlobal,  EdTech  is  becoming  a  global  phenomenon,  and  as  distribution  and 

platforms scale internationally, the market is projected to grow at 17.0% per annum, to USD252 billion by 

2020. India’s digital  learning market was  valued at USD2 billion in 2016 and is  projected to grow at a 

CAGR of 30%, reaching USD5.7 billion in 2020 as per estimates from Technopak. 

As per Forbes, in 2017, across every market involved in EdTech, international funding reached a new 

record  of  USD9.52  billion,  and  813  different  EdTech  companies  received  fundings  last  year.  These 

EdTech  investments  mark  a  gain  of  30%  from  2016.  VC  interest  in  the  education  space  continues  to 

grow. For example, one of India’s leading EdTech startups Byju’s raised USD40 million from Tencent in 

July  2017, just  four months  after  raising  USD30 million  from  Belgium-based  Verlinvest.  Among Byju’s 

other investors include Sequoia Capital and The Chan Zuckerberg Foundation. 

AI has the potential to bring about changes in the sector by supplementing pedagogy and establishing 

systems to inform and support decision making across stakeholders and administrative levels. However, 

                                                      
20 Cross Square Foundation, Ed Tech Adoption Survey 
21 Economic Survey, 2016-17 

 

36 

 

 

 

implementation  of  AI  must  be  preceded  by  efforts  to  digitise  records  of  teacher  performance,  student 

performance, and curriculum. Several AI tools are being successfully used in other parts of the world, 

and they can be adapted to the Indian context to target specific challenges. 

a)  Adaptive learning tools for customised learning: While AI may not completely replace a teacher, it 

has the potential to greatly assist teachers in efficiently and effectively managing multi-level / multi-

grade  classrooms,  by  judging  learning  levels  of  individual  students,  and  allowing  automated 

development  of  customised  educational  content  adapted  to  each  child’s  class  and  learning  level. 

Assessing time spent by a student on each part / page of the learning material, for example, would 

allow real-time feedback on student performance to help the teacher appropriately tailor her guidance 

to the child. This concept can be extended to automatic grading of tests, as well.  

 

b) 

Intelligent and interactive tutoring systems: Intelligent Tutoring Systems can provide great benefit to 

students through delivery of learning materials adapted to the child’s proficiency level, learning style, 

and pace of learning. In-built pop-up questions tailored to students, for example, can help increase 

interactivity, and catch student’s attention and interest. It can also help in assessment of student’s 

level of attention or comprehension to appropriately design remedial instruction. GradeGuardian, for 

example,  uses  predictive  models  and  visualisations  for  student  performance  with  an  interactive 

dashboard  showing  anticipated  effect  of  policy  changes.  Submission  includes  3  components 

packaged as a single web app – a Chatbot that inputs student information, an Advisor Console that 

shows students at risk, and a prediction module for policymakers. 

 

 9: Creating ‘smart content’ for improved interactivity 

Content Technologies Inc.  (CTI), an AI research and development  company,  develops AI that creates 

customised educational content. Using deep learning to absorb and analyse existing course materials, 

textbooks, and course curriculum, the technology creates custom learning materials, including textbooks, 

chapter summaries, and multiple-choice tests.  

A recent hackathon conducted by NITI Aayog also featured ‘ReadEx’, an android application that does 

real-time question generation using NLP, content recommendations, and flashcard creation. 

c)  Predictive tools to inform pre-emptive action for students predicted to drop out of school: Analysis of 

test results and attendance records using AI can be used to predict probable student activities and 

inform  pre-emptive  action.  For  instance,  in  a  recent  preliminary  experiment  conducted  in  Andhra 

Pradesh, AI applications processed data on all students based on parameters such as gender, socio-

economic factors, academic performance, school infrastructure, teacher skills, etc., with the objective 

of helping the government identify students likely to drop out. Test results could inform suggestions 

to enroll students in vocational studies. Additionally, redressal mechanisms could be put in place to 

identify students whose performance can be improved by focus of existing schemes to their family. 

 

37 

 

 

 

 

 

 10: Microsoft is helping in predicting drop outs in Andhra 

Pradesh 

The AP government is making concerted efforts to bring down the school dropout rate in the state. It has 

tied up with Microsoft to address this complex challenge. Based on specific parameters, such as gender, 

socio-economic  demographics,  academic  performance,  school  infrastructure  and  teacher  skills,  an 

application  powered  by  Azure  Machine  Learning  processes  the  data  pertaining  to  all  students  to  find 

predictive patterns. 

With these data insights, the district education officials can intervene and help students  who are most 

likely to drop out. A variety of programs and counselling sessions could be conducted for these students 

and their parents. 

The Andhra Pradesh government, based on machine learning and analytics, has identified about 19,500 

probable dropouts from government schools in Visakhapatnam district for the next academic year (2018-

19). 

d)  Automated rationalisation of teachers: AI tools can be used to develop automated teacher  posting 

and transfer systems, using analytics based on demand – supply gaps across schools in the State, 

candidate’s prior postings, candidate preferences, etc. This would help in plugging of gaps in teacher 

distribution more effectively. 

e)  Customised professional development courses: To tackle issues of poorly designed professional 

development courses with poor coverage, adaptive AI tools can be used to design automated, 

customised professional development training content for the teacher based on their performance, 

identification of their knowledge and skill gaps. This could then be continuously adapted as 

teacher’s skills and concepts improve. 

 

 11: WriteToLearn by Pearson 

Pearson’s  WriteToLearn  software  uses  natural  language  processing  technology  to  give  students 

personalised feedback, hints, and tips to improve their writing skills. In describing his experience using 

WriteToLearn,  one  7th-grade  English  language  arts  teacher  said,  “I  feel  it’s  pretty  accurate.  …  Is  it 
perfect? No. But when I reach that 67th essay, I’m not [really] accurate, either. As a team, [WriteToLearn 

and  I]  are  pretty  good.”  Essay  grading  technology  cannot  substitute  for  a  teacher’s  ability  to  provide 

feedback and coaching on particular words and sentences: the software merely rates students’ essays 

in  general  areas—  such  as  organisation,  idea  development,  and  style—and  then  provides  generic 

suggestions for improvement in these areas. But when teachers use the software as a first pass at grading 

and then interject their detailed feedback to address the improvement areas identified by the software, 

essay  grading  becomes  a  much  less  time-consuming  and  laborious  process.  The  net  result  is  that 

teachers  can  spend  less  time  grading  and  more  time  teaching,  while  also  giving  students  more 

opportunities to receive customised feedback on their writing. 

 

 

38 

 

 

 

Smart Cities and Infrastructure 

India is currently in the midst of a surge of urbanisation. While the percentage of the population living in 
urban areas was estimated to be 31% in 201122, recent research on satellite data indicates that this figure 
is close 45% today23, and predicted to rise to up-to 60 percent by 205024. Though seen as an important 

aspect  of  a  country’s  economic  growth  and  a  major  step  in  the  overall  development  of  the  country, 

unplanned urbanisation presents challenges such as congestion, over pollution, high crime rates, poor 

living standards, and can potentially put a huge burden on the infrastructure and administrative needs of 

existing Indian cities. 

To tackle these challenges, the Government of India has embarked on an ambitious initiative to set up 

Smart  Cities  across  India,  aimed  at  driving  economic  growth  and  improving  the  quality  of  life,  by 

harnessing IT solutions. As part of the Smart Cities Mission, 99 cities have been selected with expected 

investment  of  INR2.04  lakh  crores.  The  strategic  components  of  these  Smart  Cities  include  city 

improvement (retrofitting), city renewal (redevelopment) and city extension (greenfield development) in 

addition to a pan-city initiative in which smart solutions are applied covering large parts of the city. The 

Atal  Mission  for  Rejuvenation  and  Urban  Transformation  (AMRUT)  is  another  related  initiative  which 

targets improving the infrastructure of existing cities.  

Smart cities attempt to address the challenges of urbanisation through development of features based 

on IT solutions, some of which are listed below.  

a)  Poor urban planning25: Smart cities aim to solve challenges of inefficient land use, improper land use 

categorisation, area based development and lack of open spaces such as parks, playgrounds, and 

recreational spaces in order to enhance the quality of life of citizens, reduce the urban heat effect, 

and generally promote improved ecological balance. 

b) 

Inefficient utility distribution: Through large scale deployment of smart meters in both electricity and 

water, smart cities being developed are trying to solve challenges such as low visibility on usage of 

utilities  such  as  electricity,  water,  and  waste  management.  This  is  also  targeted  to  help  address 

issues of leakages in electricity and water distribution, and improper disposal of waste, and have the 

potential to significantly reduce cost associate with administration and management.  

c) 

Improved delivery of citizen services: In the domain of service delivery, smart cities aim to harness 

data to solve issues in low accountability and transparency. By using digital channels, they can help 

address  challenges  in  administration  of  offices,  and  long  wait  times.  Today,  poor  standards  of 

grievance redressal form another pressing issue that may be addressed by increasing adoption of 

technology based solutions.  

d) 

Improving public safety: Cities in India today are hotbeds for a range of crimes. Smart cities aim to 

address the issues of increase in crime and increased risk of urban emergencies through improved 

city design and surveillance analytics.  

Some Smart Cities have already begun implementing these features through specific projects. Pune, for 

example, has launched The Pune Street Light Project to setup energy efficient street lights that can be 

remote controlled through a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems. Surat has built 

a network of more than 600 surveillance cameras which will be expanded to all major locations in the 

                                                      
22 Census 2011 
23 LiveMint: “How much of India is actually urban?” 
24 LiveMint: “60% of India’s population to live in cities by 2050: government” 
25 Smartcities.gov.in 

 

39 

 

 

 

city,  as  well  as  collaborated  with  Microsoft  to  develop  solutions  for  water  management  and  urban 

planning.  

Due to the large amount of data they can create, smart cities are especially amenable to application of 

AI, which can make sense of the data being generated, and transform it into predictive intelligence – thus 

transitioning from a smart city to an ‘intelligent city’.  

However, the wide range of connected devices also gives rise to increased risks in cyber security, with 

harmful actors such as hackers now capable of affecting city scale infrastructure.  

Some use cases of AI that can augment the features of a smart city are listed below.  

a)  Smart  Parks  and  public  facilities:  Public  facilities  such  as  parks  and  other  spaces  contribute 

substantially to a city’s liveability. Use of AI to monitor patronage and accordingly control associated 

systems such as pavement lighting, park maintenance and other operational conditions could lead 

to cost savings while also improving safety and accessibility.  

b)  Smart  Homes:  Smart  homes  concept  is  creating  buzz  with  AI  technologies  being  developed  to 

optimise  human  effort  in  performing  daily  activities.  Extending  this  concept  to  other  domestic 

applications such as smart rooftops, water saving applications optimising domestic water utilisation 

for different human activities etc.  

c)  AI  driven  service  delivery:  Implementation  of  AI  to  leverage  data  on  service  delivery  could  see 

application  such  as  predictive  service  delivery  on  the  basis  of  citizen  data,  rationalisation  of 

administrative personnel on the basis of predicted service demand and migration trend analysis, and 

AI based grievance redressal through chat-bots.   

d)  Crowd management: Use of AI in providing effective solutions in crowd management in recent times 

have  been  in  vogue  and  given  fruitful  results  in  averting  city-scale  challenges  such  as  managing 

mega footfall events, emergency and disasters. Accenture worked with the Singapore Government 
during  their  SG50  Celebrations  (50th  anniversary  of  Singapore’  independence),  and  developed 

solution  aimed  at  predicting  crowd  behavior  and  potential  responses  to  incidents.  The  solution 

resulted in 85% accuracy in high crowd activity, crowd size estimation and object detection. Closer 

home,  the  “Kumbh  Mela  Experiment”  is  aimed  at  predicting  crowd  behavior  and  possibility  of  a 

stampede.  Similar  Big  Data  and  AI  solutions  could  help  with  advance  prediction  and  response 

management. 

e) 

Intelligent safety systems: AI technology could provide safety through smart command centres with 

sophisticated surveillance systems that could keep checks on people’s movement, potential crime 

incidents, and general security of the residents. Social media intelligence platforms can provide aid 

to  public  safety  by  gathering  information  from  social  media  and  predicting  potential  activities  that 

could  disrupt  public  peace.  In  the  city  of  Surat,  the  crime  rate  has  declined  by  27%  after  the 

implementation of AI powered safety systems.  

f)  Cyber-attacks:  Cyber-attacks  seem  to  pose  a  great  threat  to  our  institutions  and  public  systems, 

today. AI technologies possess the capability to detect vulnerabilities and take remedial measures to 

minimise exposure of secure online platforms containing highly sensitive data from being targeted by 

unscrupulous social elements. 

 

 

 

 

40 

 

 

 

Smart Mobility and Transportation 

Mobility and transportation form the backbone of the modern economy due to their linkages with other 

sectors  and  importance  in  both  domestic  and  international  trades.  Today’s  society  demands  a  high 

degree of mobility of various kinds, so as to enable efficient and safe transportation of both  people and 

goods.  As  a  major  contributor  to  overall  emissions,  this  sector  must  also  be  sensitive  to  ideas  of 

environmental sustainability.  

In India, majority of both passenger and freight traffic is carried through roads and railways. As of 2007 – 

08, roads and railways accounted for almost 87% of total freight traffic in the country and almost 90% of 
total traffic as of 2011-1226. As the economy grows, it is expected that this reliance on these modes of 

transport  shall  continue  unless  there are  major  shifts  in the  policy  initiatives  in the area. The  fact  that 

these  modes  of  transport  are  particularly  pollution  intensive  compared  to  shipping  and  air  transport, 

further increase the need to implement smart practices in their deployment.  

Even apart from issues in poor modal mix, the Indian transportation sector faces a variety of issues.  

a)  Congestion and road accidents: Despite having one of the most extensive transportation networks in 

the  world,  various  sub-sectors  sector  continues  to  be  underdeveloped  leading  to  economic 

inefficiency and enormous human cost. Congestion and its associated costs in India are continually 

on the rise. Statistics from Government of India and a study conducted by IIT Madras suggest the 

following growth patterns over the years, respectively. 

 

Figure 15: Total registered motor vehicles per 1,000 population 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                      
26 NTDPC, India Transport Report: Moving India to 2032 

 

41 

 

 

Source: 
Cost 
Estimates  
for Road 
Congestion 
in Delhi, IIT 
(Madras) 

 

 

Figure 16: Projected cost of congestion (USD million / year) 

 

b)  High  number  of  traffic  deaths:  According  to  a  PIB  release  by  the  Ministry  of  Road  Transport  and 

Highways (MORTH) in March 2017, the total number of road accidents in the country during 2015 

was 501,423 which resulted to 146,133 fatalities. The National Highways (NHs) accounted for about 

29.1% share of total road accidents and 35.0% of total fatalities. Although the existing NHs comprise 

approximately  1.9 % of total road network, they carry about 40% of total road traffic. According to 

MORTH statistics, there has been a steady  increase in the number of on-road accidents over the 

years. 

 

c)  Lack  of  public  transportation  infrastructure:  Public  transport  infrastructure  development  remains 

laggard in the overall discourse of transport policy design, either at national and regional levels, with 

focus  directed  towards  promoting  and  improving  private  car  and  associated  infrastructure.  The 

following statistics from MORTH indicates the modal share of public transport (buses) over the years 

which has seen, but minimal increase over the years.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

42 

 

 

 

 

Source: 
MORTH 

 

 

Figure 17: Total numbers of public buses per 1,000 population 

 

d)  Assisted vehicle technologies: Autonomy is not economically viable in India currently as driver costs 

per  kilometre  is  too  low.  However,  investing  in  the  suite  of  autonomous  vehicle  technologies  and 

exporting such vehicles represents a significant economic opportunity for India and since the same 

technologies can play a large role in reducing fatalities and decreasing congestion, it would be wise 

for Indian manufactures to invest in research and development of the broader suite of technologies 

that are essential for assistive AI. These technologies can assist the driver by taking driving decisions 

which  the  system  has  a  high  degree  of  confidence  in  and  alerting  the  driver  in  case  it  has  a  low 

degree  of  confidence  in  any  decision.  A  prime  example  of  such  productised,  assistive  AI  is  the 

advanced cruise control used in Tesla vehicles today. This can follow highway traffic and the curves 

in the road as well as start and stop in response to traffic. However, the moment the driver gives any 

input, the system is taken over by the driver. This hybrid approach is much safer than an unassisted 

human driving, without the potential drawbacks of having a completely autonomous system. There 

is another reason why India should not completely ignore assistive vehicle technology research, and 

it has to do with the development of new public infrastructure. Since we have only recently begun 

building  a  large  share  of  the  total  requirement  of  greenfield  infrastructure,  we  have  the  benefit  of 

hindsight.  

 

e)  Need for sustainable transportation: The recent initiative of the Government of India for announcing 

development of 100 Smart Cities is aimed at addressing this anomaly and catalyse smart strategies 

for urban planning which promote sustainable land use design and multimodal integration. While new 

initiatives could take time to show realisable impact, the existing issues in urban mobility related to 

congestion, efficient traffic flow, movement of goods etc. can indeed be solved using AI technology. 

AI  can  power  multimodal  integration  by  assisting  with  scheduling  public  transportation  systems, 

improved accessibility to public transportation infrastructure based on users’ choice behaviours, while 

also  suggesting  real-time  travel  mode  advisory  based  on  predicted  traffic  situation.  AI  enabled 

mobility solutions can ameliorate several of the challenges being faced by the Indian automotive and 

transportation sector. 

 

f)  Efficiencies  in  design  of  greenfield  infrastructure  –  Autonomous-ready  traffic  will  have  significant 

impacts on greenfield road infrastructure design and consequently on greenfield city design.  Lane 

size, lesser traffic congestion and reduced costs in upgradation of highway infrastructure are some 

of the externalities which will benefit the sector of assisted vehicle adoption.   

 

43 

 

 

 

Listed below are some of the major applications of AI on the mobility front beyond autonomous cars: 

a)  Autonomous trucking: Autonomous technology in trucking has the potential to transform the way we 

move goods today. AI can help increase safety and hauling efficiency through intelligent platooning, 

wherein trucks form platoons giving drivers the liberty to rest while the platoon keeps moving. Such 

a method also ensures optimal road-space utilisation, helping improve road infrastructure capacity.  

 

b) 

Intelligent  Transportation  Systems:  Through  the  use  of  an  intelligent  traffic  management  system 

including  sensors,  CCTV  cameras,  automatic  number  plate  recognition  cameras,  speed  detection 

cameras, signalised pedestrian crossings and stop line violation detection systems and the use of 

AI, real time dynamic decisions on traffic flows such as lane monitoring, access to exits, toll pricing, 

allocating right of way to public transport vehicles, enforcing traffic regulations through smart ticketing 

etc. can be made. Accident heat maps could be generated using accident data and driver behaviour 

at specific locations on the road network related to topology, road geometric design, speed limit etc. 

and suitable measures could be pre-emptively taken to prevent possible accidents. Also, AI could 

help  to  design  sophisticated  urban  traffic  control  systems  that  can  optimise  signal  timings  at  the 

intersection,  zonal  and  network  level,  while  also  facilitating  services  such  as  automatic  vehicle 

detection for extension of red/green phase or providing intermittent priority.  

 

c)  Travel route/flow optimisation: With access to traffic data at the network level, AI can help make smart 

predictions for public transport journeys by optimising total journey time including access time, waiting 

time  and  travel  time.  Considering  factors  such  as  accessibility  to  nearest  mode  of  travel,  most 

convenient access path based on local conditions and one’s preferences, AI can revolutionise first-

last  mile  travel  which  could  change  the  way  we  perceive  public  transport  journeys,  today.  About 

private car usage,  AI could utilise a range of traffic data sets and one’s own preferences to make 

human-like decisions on route selection. With information on dynamic tolls and traffic flows on links, 

the  dependency  on  overhead  Variable  Messaging  Systems  (VMS)  could  be  minimised,  reducing 

substantial infrastructure costs. On the systemic level, AI can help predict flow of traffic at the network 

level and suggest alternative flow strategies in order to contain congestion, alleviating cities of this 

major issue.  

 

d)  AI for Railways: According to official figures, more than 500 train accidents occurred between 2012-

2017, 53% of them due to derailment. Train operators can obtain situational intelligence through real-

time operational data and analyse them in three different dimensions: spatial, temporal and nodal. 

Fleet management and asset maintenance including that of rolling stock are pertinent AI use cases. 

Recently, the Ministry of Railways, Govt. of India has decided to use AI to undertake remote condition 

monitoring using non-intrusive sensors for monitoring signals, track circuits, axle counters and their 

sub-systems of interlocking, power supply systems including the voltage and current levels, relays, 

timers.  

 

e)  Community Based Parking: The availability of parking is a major issue for Indian cities. AI can help 

optimise parking, likely by minimising vehicle downtime and maximising driving time. With the advent 

of electric vehicles, AI will be needed to mediate the complex vehicle grid interactions(VGI) as well 

as for charging optimisation. Parking guidance systems help drivers to find vacant parking spaces 

while they are using the road network and have approached close to their destination. Community 

44 

 

 

 

 

 

based parking using AI helps cars in traffic to collect data on vacant parking spaces, and allocates 

cars to spaces such that the demand is always met. 

 12: Effect on R&D 

Globally,  research  on  autonomous  vehicle  has  spurred  advances,  especially  in  AI  fields  of  computer 

vision and robotics. Due to the extremely high market potential, over the past two years, most of the large 

investments in AI have been made in the field of autonomous vehicle as it is widely tipped to be the first 

large scale commercial application of AI to be adopted. 

Moreover, due to the congestion and chaotic conditions of Indian traffic, AI algorithms trained on Indian 

driving data have the potential to be very robust.  

Error rates of object classification have fallen from 28.5% to 2.5% since 2010 according to the Stanford 

AI index. Therefore, current techniques are mature enough to be used in Indian conditions. Also, within 

AI,  the  core  technologies  used  have  high  transference  potential.  The  same  template  used  to  identify 

objects on a road can be used to identify cancerous cells in a pathological image.  

 

45 

 

 

 

 

Key challenges to adoption of AI in India 

 Commonality of problems mandate an integrated approach 

The  preceding  analysis  of  focus  sectors  –  Healthcare,  Agriculture,  Education,  Smart  Cities  and 

Infrastructure, and Smart Mobility and Transport, highlight the potential of AI tools and technologies in 

transforming the sectors and state of Indian economy as a whole. The analysis, however, also detail a 

multitude of challenges that India needs to overcome to realise the full potential of a disruptive technology 

like AI. 

Adopting a narrow view and focusing on the challenges for a specific sector, the barriers to developing a 

robust set of AI applications may seem contextual and limited to that sector. Taking Healthcare sector as 

an example, enabling large scale adoption would require at least the following factors to be addressed:  

a)  absence of collaborative effort between various stakeholders: while India has adopted electronic 

health record (EHR) policy, sharing of data between various hospital chains still remains a work 

in  progress,  since  different  hospital  chains  have  adopted  different  interpretations  of  ‘digitising 

records’; 

b)  relevant data is unavailable and there is absence of robust open clinical data sets; and 

c)  concerns  on  privacy  and  security  of  data,  including  lack  of  formal  regulation  around 

anonymisation of data. 

However, analysing across the focus sectors, the challenges are concentrated across common themes 

of: 

a)  Lack of enabling data ecosystems  

b)  Low intensity of AI research 

i. 

ii. 

Core research in fundamental technologies 

Transforming core research into market applications 

c) 

Inadequate availability of AI expertise, manpower and skilling opportunities 

d)  High resource cost and low awareness for adopting AI in business processes 

e)  Unclear privacy, security and ethical regulations  

f)  Unattractive Intellectual Property regime to incentivise research and adoption of AI 

These  challenges,  while  by  no  means  exhaustive,  if  addressed  in  an  expeditious  manner  through 

concerted collaborative efforts by relevant stakeholders, with government playing a leading role, could 

lead to fundamental building blocks that form the core to India’s march towards leadership in AI. The next 

section  of  the  paper  attempts  to  solve  some  of  these  challenge  through  specific  interventions  and 

recommendations.  These  recommendations  have  been  formulated  as  fundamentally  infrastructural  in 

nature, and hence span across sectoral use cases.

46 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Way Forward to Harness the Power of AI 

 Recommendations 

India’s unique challenges and aspirations, combined with the advancement in AI, and a desire to assume 

leadership in this nascent technology means India’s approach towards AI strategy has to be balanced for 

both local needs and greater good. The way forward for India in AI has to factor in our current strengths 

in AI, or a lack thereof, and thus requires large scale transformational interventions, primarily led by the 

government, with private sector providing able support. 

This section lays down a set of recommendation to address the biggest challenges and opportunities for 

India in the field of AI. The preceding analysis of focus sectors lead us to the assertion that the efforts 

need to be concentrated across major themes of research, data democratisation, accelerating adoption 

and  reskilling  –  with  privacy,  security,  ethics  and  intellectual  property  rights  permeating  as  common 

denominators for all our recommended initiatives.  These challenges, while by no means exhaustive, if 

addressed  in  an  expeditious manner  through  concerted collaborative  efforts  by  relevant stakeholders, 

with government playing a catalytic role, could lead to fundamental building blocks that can form the core 

to India’s march towards achieving its goal of #AIforAll. 

India’s capabilities in AI research are rather limited, both in quantity (distant 5th globally) and especially 

in quality (disappointing impact of research produced). The research community is rather confined to a 

handful  of  academic  institutes,  and  relies  on  individual  brilliance  rather  than  institutional  competence. 

Acerbating the problem is the fact that private sector’s contribution to AI research has remained meagre. 

Despite some encouraging recent developments, viz. Government of Karnataka’s intention to set up a 

Centre of Excellence in AI in partnership with NASSCOM, a lot of ground needs to be covered. The first 

set  of  recommendations  focus  on  turbocharging  both  core  and  applied  research.  In  addition,  two 

frameworks for solving some of AI’s biggest research challenges through collaborative, market oriented 

approach have been proposed. 

The new age of AI and related frontier technologies would disrupt the nature of jobs of tomorrow and the 

skills  required  to  realise  the  true  potential  of  these  transformative  technologies.  The  changes  and 

challenges anticipated for the workforce will come from both the demand and supply side: demand for 

capabilities for jobs that don’t even exist today and diminished demand for some of the jobs that could 

be  automated,  supply  of  newly  minted  STEM  graduates,  a  large  portion  of  whom  may  struggle  to  be 

gainfully employed. Given our strength in advanced IT sector and the strength of favorable demographics, 

India may seem more equipped for workforce disruption that AI will bring, however our large numbers 

may soon turn from potential assets to liabilities if right structures are not put in place. Our next set of 

recommendations focus on reskilling of existing workforce and preparing students for developing applied 

set of skills for the changing world of technology. 

Early  adoption  of  AI  –  be  it  the  research  community  building  technology  infrastructure,  the  startup 

community developing applications and corporations deploying solutions for their business needs, would 

be one of the key determinants in ensuring leadership in AI. Adoption of AI in India has remained rather 

limited, less than a quarter of firms in India are using AI in any form for their business processes and 

startup  ecosystem  in  AI  is  virtually  non-existent.  Among  the  several  impediments  towards  large  scale 

48 

 

 

 

 

 

adoption of AI in India, the primary ones include difficulty in access to data (more specifically, structured 

and  intelligent  data),  high  cost  and  low  availability  of  computing  infrastructure,  lack  of  collaborative 

approach  to  solving  for  AI  combined  with  low  awareness.  Our  recommendations  to  address  these 

challenges  include  developing  large  foundational  annotated  data  sets  to  democratise  data  and  multi-

stakeholder marketplaces across the AI value chain (data, annotated data and AI models). 

One of the key aspects of our ambition of #AIforAll includes responsible AI: ensuring adequate privacy, 

security and IP related concerns and balancing ethical considerations with need for innovation. Our final 

set of recommendations lay down the challenges and suggestion for addressing some of  these not so 

straightforward implementational challenges of AI.  

The recommendations in the following chapters are aimed at initiating an informed conversation on India’s 

future roadmap for AI, and are descriptive rather than prescriptive by design. The paper should be seen 

as providing framework for developing National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence, and as such, we have 

consciously avoided providing specific funding targets and funding mechanisms, as these require broad 

based stakeholder consultations. 

 

 

 

49 

 

 

  

 Research 

 

 Incentivising Core and Applied research in AI 

 

Advanced research, both  core  and  applied,  provides  the  basis  for  commercialisation  and  utilisation of 

any emerging technology, more so for technologies like AI. 

Where does India stand in Artificial Intelligence research? 

India has the necessary building blocks to develop a thriving AI research and development ecosystem, 

viz. availability of highly educated talent pool, world class educational institutes and an illustrious list of 

top notch IT companies dominating the global IT landscape. Despite these advantages India sees itself 

lagging considerably in producing world-class research and innovation in most technology fields, more 

so in AI. 

India produced a whopping 2.6 million27 STEM graduates in 2016, second only to China and more than 

4 times the graduates produced by USA, thus producing the requisite talent pool to drive innovation in 

emerging technologies. Disappointingly though, an overwhelming majority of this talent pool is focused 

on  routine  IT  development  and  not  so  much  on  research  and  innovation.  Exacerbating  the  problem 

further, a majority of the small population focused on research almost always prefers to pursue advance 

degrees (Masters or PhD degrees) to subsequently apply their expertise abroad.  

An analysis of India’s competence in core research in AI paints a somber picture. As per the Global AI 

Talent Report 2018, which crawled LinkedIn for its analysis, India only has 386 of a total of 22,000 PhD-
educated  researchers  worldwide,  and  is  ranked  10th  globally.  The  report  also  looks  at  leading  AI 

conferences globally for presenters who could be considered influential experts in their respective field 
of AI. On this metric, India was ranked 13th globally, with just 44 top-notch presenters. While these two 

approaches have their limitations and inherent biases, anecdotal evidence based on discussions with top 

researchers  reveals  that  serious  research  work  in  India  is  limited  to  less  than  50  researchers, 

concentrated mostly at institutes like IITs, IIITs and IISc. 

In terms of the citable documents published in the field of AI from 2010 - 2016, India ranks a distant 5th, 

far behind the likes of China and USA and just about edging ahead of Germany and France who have 

considerably smaller STEM population. 

 

 

 

 

                                                      
27 World Economic Forum 

 

50 

 

 

 

Figure 18: Citable documents in Artificial Intelligence (2010 - 2016) 

Source: 
Scimago 
Journal and 
Country 
Rank (SJR) 

Source: 
Scimago 
Journal and 
Country 
Rank (SJR) 

 

Diving  deeper  into  these  numbers,  if  we  look  at  the  country  wise  H-Index  (a  metric  that  quantifies  a 
country’s scientific productivity and scientific impact), India ranks a dismal 19th globally. In other words, 

while India may be producing research pieces in numbers, their utility has been rather limited.  

Figure 19: H Index for Artificial Intelligence (1996 - 2016) 

 

Looking at the research coming out of academic institutes, the numbers are heavily skewed in favour of 

top-15 institutes, that in total have contributed more than 42% of all research publications from 2001 – 
201628. IISc dominates the research publications, with 7.5% of all publications coming from this institute. 

For  a  country  that  has  more  than  750  universities  and  close  to  40,000  colleges,  this  concentration  of 

publication is a worrying sign. 

The Indian IT services companies, the likes of TCS, Wipro and Infosys, have been the flag bearers of 

India’s  competence  in  implementation  of  cutting  edge  technology  solutions,  yet  their  contribution  to 

research has been limited. Given that these IT giants have been working closely with businesses globally 

and anticipating the trends in emerging technologies, it wouldn’t be unreasonable to expect a sizeable 

volume of research work coming out  of these companies.  Yet, looking at all  the research publications 

from 2001 – 2016, only 14% of all publications have come from industry, with universities contributing 

86% of all publications. Even this limited research publication universe by industry is dominated by Indian 
subsidiaries of international companies (~70%), with only one Indian company in top-10 (TCS)29.  

 

                                                      
28 Neel Shah: “Research trends of AI in India” 
29 Neel Shah: “Research trends of AI in India” 

 

51 

 

 

 

 13: What India can learn from other economies in terms of AI 

Research 

The US Government is estimated to have spent USD1.2 billion in non-classified research in 2016-18 and 

the Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) is seeking a budget of USD3.44 billion in 

fiscal  year  2019-20,  an  increase  of  8.5%  compared  with  its  request  for  fiscal  2018-19.  However,  US 

leadership in AI investment has largely been driven by the private sector. The world’s leading companies 

in AI  research in 2016  were Microsoft, Google and IBM, all  US  companies.  According to CB  Insights, 

based on 2017 figures, Amazon, Google and Microsoft dominate enterprise AI – again all US companies. 

It is estimated that more than half the world’s unicorns are from the US. The digital ecosystems around 

the  hubs  of  Silicon  Valley,  Seattle,  Boston  and  New  York,  which  bring  together  talent  and  research 

capabilities from leading universities, private investment and cross-science / industry collaboration, can 

be considered to have played an important role in developing the US’s AI capabilities. 

While still behind the US in terms of overall investment, China has clear ambitions to be at the same level 

as the US by 2020 and the world leader in AI by 2030, supported by a new development plan to create 

a USD150 billion domestic AI industry. Its plans to build a new AI industry include a national fund that 

supports  research,  from  the  most  basic  research  to  critical  AI  projects.  The  top  9  universities  have 

received  government  funding  to  each  establish  an  AI  school  and  the  remaining  32  to  include  an  AI 

programme as part of their curriculum. The Ministry of Industry and Information Technology is planning 

to put nearly USD950 million dollars per year into strategic AI projects for State Owned Enterprises and 

the public sector. In addition to state investment, the government is expected (at the time of writing) to 

publish Next Generation AI Development Guidelines immanently. The guidelines are expected to include 

a  clear  governance  structure,  with  allocation  of  responsibility  and  plans  for  research,  industry  and 

legislative action or each of 2020, 2025 and 2030. 

While  China’s  approach  is  not  necessarily  replicable  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  there  are  two  key 

learnings from its programme: 

•  Public sector investment, particularly in R&D, helps drive private investment. 

• 

It has a plan with a governance structure and clear milestones. Having a plan instils confidence in 

inward investors. Based on interviews Accenture carried out with inward investors in the UK, there 

was  consensus  that  the  governments’  public  messaging  had  a  significant  impact  on  companies’ 

confidence and therefore willingness to invest in a country. 

In  the  UK,  the  universities  of  Cambridge  and  Oxford  are  considered  centres  of  AI  innovation;  having 

already stimulated three startups that made major AI breakthroughs and later became prime acquisition 

targets.  Google  in  2014  bought  DeepMind,  Apple  in  2015  purchased  VocalIQ,  and  Microsoft  bought 

SwiftKey  in 2016. This success is supported  by funding from organisations like the Leverhulme Trust, 

which provides annual funding of GBP80 million for research. Other capabilities include The Alan Turing 

Institute: the  national  institute for data science. The Institute was  established  in 2015 by five founding 

universities (Cambridge, Edinburgh, Oxford, UCL and Warwick) and the UK Engineering and Physical 

Sciences Research Council. The Institute’s researchers work across disciplines and look at  theoretical 

development and application to real world problems. It was announced as the national centre for AI in 

November 2017 and six new universities will join the institute 2018. 

The  German  Research  Centre  for  Artificial  Intelligence  (DFKI  –  Deutsches  Forschungszentrum  für 

Künstliche Intelligenz) is one of the world’s largest AI research institutes. It has facilities in the German 

cities of Kaiserslautern, Saarbrücken, Bremen and Berlin and is partnering with companies on application 

oriented basic research to develop product functions, prototypes and patentable solutions. 

 

52 

 

 

 

The  EU’s  Robotics  Public  Private  Partnership,  launched  in  2013,  has  seen  the  allocation  of  EUR700 

million for research to 2020. This  is coupled  with private investment for an overall backing of  EUR2.8 

billion.  

It  is  believed  to  be  the  biggest  civilian  research  programme  in  this  area  in  the  world  and  could  be 

considered instrumental in the strong presence of Europe among service robot manufacturers. Clearly, 

public-sector investment has paid-off. 

Source: Realising the economic and societal potential of responsible AI, Accenture 

The research ecosystem in India has seen some green shoots in recent years. Encouraging is the fact 

that the  number of papers  published has jumped 10 fold in  last  10  years, from 331 papers in 2006 to 
3,301 papers in 201630. IISc, almost all the IITs, some of the IIITs and central / state universities have 

increased their research efforts in various foundational and applied fields of AI. IIT Bombay and IIT Patna 

have entered into a joint research collaboration with industry to focus on the applied aspects of AI. The 

research,  focused  on  IT  services  and  social  good,  will  aim  to  provide  powerful  AI  insights  and 

recommendations  for  improved  productivity.  It  also  includes  software  analytics  –  building,  testing, 

managing and modernisation of applications, solving real-life social issues such as malnutrition, human 

trafficking and climate change through prediction and recommendation models using AI. 

Another research group at IISc is working on the theory and application of reinforcement learning (RL), 

an aspect of machine learning used in optimisation problems. They are particularly interested in traffic 

handling—both the vehicular kind on our roads, as well as the digital kind in our wireless networks. 

Furthermore,  there  have  been  some  encouraging  efforts  from  both  government  and  private  sector  in 

facilitating  top  quality  research  in  recent  times.  Government  of  Karnataka  is  setting  up  a  Centre  of 

Excellence  for  Data  Science  and  Artificial  Intelligence  in  partnership  with  NASSCOM.  Wadhwani 

Foundation has set up India’s first research institute dedicated to developing AI solutions for social good 

in Mumbai in Feb 2018. 

However,  the  research  ecosystem  still  has  several  obvious  gaps.  The  Detailed  Project  Report  of  

Inter-Ministerial National  Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber  Physical  Systems has highlighted some of 

these as:  

a)  Lack  of  collaborative  /  interdisciplinary  approach:  research  is  mostly  focused  in  silos  in  academic 

institutions 

b)  Lack of scale for experimental validation: due to various practical and financial reasons, university 

research is largely restricted to theoretical or laboratory scale. This needs to be augmented with pilot 

projects / large scale test beds / laboratories 

c)  Lack of facilities to support large scale experimental test beds: Large scale experimental test-beds 

are difficult to construct, maintain and operate, solely by academic institutions 

d)  Lack of connect with stakeholders and practitioners to convert outputs to outcomes: The views of the 

stakeholders in terms of what application problems to focus on will be of great importance to ensure 

practical applicability of the research. At the same time, this should be facilitated in a way which does 

not constraint/suffocate the academic researchers in order for them to make foundational advances. 

Involving  “technology  translators”  at  an  early  stage,  i.e.  entrepreneurs/agencies/companies  which 

can convert the research technologies to commercial products is needed. 

                                                      
30 Scimago Journal and Country Rank (SJR) 

 

53 

 

 

 

e)  Lack of large scale mission mode project management capabilities:  Academic researchers usually 

work best individually (with a small team of students and research project staff). Current approaches 

to research and related facilities may not be suited for large scale experimental projects. 

While  the  numbers  point  to  a  small  yet  encouraging  base,  a  concerted  effort  is  needed  to  build  a 

comprehensive  research  focused  AI  strategy  for  India,  one  that  will  position  India  towards  global 

leadership in this emerging area of technology. What is evident though is that incremental changes would 

not suffice and there is need for transformational changes to boost research major push coming from the 

government. 

Framework for promoting Artificial Intelligence Research in India 

The  Detailed  Project  Report  of  Inter-Ministerial  National  Mission  on  Interdisciplinary  Cyber  Physical 

Systems (IM-ICPS) has suggested the following four-tier framework for promoting research focused on 

all aspects of technology life-cycle: research, technology deployment, translation and management:  

a) 

ICON  (International  Centres  of  New  Knowledge):  focusing  on  creation  of  new  knowledge  through 

basic research,  

b)  CROSS  (Centre  for  Research  On  Sub-Systems):  focusing  on  developing  and  integrating  core 

technologies developed at ICON layer and any other sources 

c)  CASTLE  (Center  for  Advanced  Studies,  Translational  research  and  Leadership):  focusing  on 

development and deployment of application based research and  

d)  CETIT (Centre of Excellence in Technology Innovation and Transfer): focusing on commercialisation 

of technologies developed 

While the above structure has significant advantages, a far more simplified and agile approach is required 

to ensure seamless, targeted and accountable framework for promoting research. Hence the following 

two-tier integrated approach to boost both core and applied research in AI is proposed:  

a)  COREs (Centres of Research Excellence in Artificial Intelligence): COREs will focus on core research 

of AI, and will take on the mantle of executing the responsibilities of both ICON and CROSS as per 

the  IM-ICPS  framework.  Thus,  COREs  will  specialise  in  creating  new  knowledge  through  basic 

research and will source for fundamental knowledge / technologies that will be needed to keep India 

prepared  for  the  next  generation  of  technologies.  Furthermore,  COREs  will  also  emphasise  on 

development  infrastructure  tools  for  direct  application  of  basic  research, including development  of 

new areas of AI architecture / platforms. 

b) 

ICTAI (International Centre for Transformational Artificial Intelligence): ICTAIs will provide the eco-

system for application based technology development and deployment, and will take on the mantle 

of executing the responsibilities of both CASTLE and CETIT as per the IM-ICPS framework. This will 

be  an  industry-led  initiative  and  expected  to  take  on  the  top-level  challenges  identified  or  inter-

ministerial  projects calling for AI based solutions. Furthermore,  ICTAIs will  also be responsible for 

delivering commercial technology, and taking ideas / concepts or prototypes and turning them into 

marketable products by way of proactive coordination, communication and interfacing for technology 

transfer to the industry. 

 

 

 

54 

 

 

 

Figure 20: Proposed integration of COREs and ICTAIs 

 

In summary, COREs will be focused on core research, in evolving and new areas of AI, and will act as 

the  technology  feeders  for  ICTAIs  which  will  be  focused  on  creating  AI  based  applications  for,  and 

accelerating early adoption in, domains of societal importance.  

In  addition,  an  umbrella  organisation  should  be  established  to  address  issues  relating  to  access  to 

finance, social sustainability and the global competitiveness of the technologies developed. This body, 

which shall be recognised  as the Centre for Studies  on Technological Sustainability (CSTS), could be 

established  on  the  lines  of  the  Campus  for  Research  Excellence  and  Technological  Enterprise 

(CREATE),  Singapore  program  or  Innovate  UK.  The  major  responsibilities  of  CSTS  could  be  on  the 

following lines: 

a) 

to monitor the impact of the AI technologies developed at the consumer level through social indices 

and recommend necessary modifications for a better market penetration 

b) 

to  study  the  financial  viability  of  the  AI  technologies  developed  such  that  it  caters  to  the  target 

consumer base, while proposing improved pricing models for a pan India reach 

c) 

to study best practices on pricing models and social penetration of AI technologies across the world 

and recommend strategies to foster globally competitive technological development 

d) 

to catalyse international collaborations for COREs and ICTAIs 

e) 

to study the AI landscape in other nations and design strategies for customisation and deployment 

of developed AI technologies as per their specifications for a global impact 

f) 

to  provide  a  knowledge  management  platform  for  AI  technologies  by  organising  international 

workshops  and  conferences,  promoting  the  confluence  of  thought  leaders,  practitioners  and 

authorities 

 

Centres of Excellence for Artificial Intelligence 

COREs for AI will focus on core research, in evolving and new areas of AI.  

 

55 

 Physical AICognitive AISensory AIGeneral AI38%ICTAIs in priority domains of Agriculture, Health, Education, Smart Cities and Infrastructure and Smart Mobility and TransportationInternational Centresfor Transformational AICentresof Research Excellence 

 

 

To start with, COREs could be established at IISc, ISI and top IITs and IIITs. Given that the research in 

AI  needs  to  be  multi-disciplinary,  linkages  need  to  be  established  with  premier  institutions  in  other 

disciplines viz.  AIIMS for healthcare, TISS for arts and social science etc. Furthermore, these COREs 

should also act as a guide and mentor for other institutes researching in AI, in a hub-and-spoke model, 

to enable broad based development of AI research capabilities across India. 

The COREs would have to build on both the short-term and the long-term capabilities of these research 

centers. In the short-term, given the paucity of  quality faculty in India in AI,  appropriate incentivisation 

mechanism  (which  could  be  a  combination  of  promise  of  topnotch  infrastructural  facilities  and 

remunerations  matching  international  standards)  to  bring  top-tier  international  faculty,  especially  the 

Indian diaspora, needs to be developed. Furthermore, the top Indian PhD aspirants, who would otherwise 

pursue  their  studies  from  top  universities  abroad,  will  need  to  be  retained  in  India,  again  through 

appropriate incentivisation mechanism. One possible way could be to institute National AI Fellowships. 

In the long-term, successive PhD classes of these COREs can increase the faculty pool and work towards 

a sustainable operational model for COREs. 

Possible focus area for the COREs for AI could be: 

a)  Sensory AI (Computer Vision, IoT etc.), 

b)  Physical AI (Robotics, Industrial Automation etc.), 

c)  Cognitive AI (NLP, worker training etc.), 

d)  General AI, 

e)  High precision learning from small data sets, 

f)  Research on new algorithms (e.g. advance cryptography, security), data sets etc., and 

g)  Explainable AI 

An application based model may be followed to selected COREs  wherein an applicant institute would 

have to demonstrate a viability plan, in terms of faculty and other capabilities, before being anointed an 

CORE. A CORE can choose to work on one or multiple focus areas. The COREs will be encouraged to 

pursue  projects  across  other  COREs,  to  promote  linkages  and  cross-functional  technologies.  The 

financial component of COREs for AI, which could be to the tune of  INR 50 crore – INR 100 crore per 

CORE, should also include large scale funding for specific projects.  

International Centers for Transformational Artificial Intelligence 

International  Centers  for  Transformational  Artificial  Intelligence  (ICTAIs)  are  envisioned  as  institutions 

focused on creating AI based applications for, and accelerating early adoptions in, domains for societal 

importance. These applied research and development institutions should be set up with the elements of 

domain or industry “pull” baked into their structure and operation. While core (or fundamental AI) research 

and teaching may not be seen as their priority areas, some flexibility might be built in the structure.  

From  both funding  and operational  perspective, the  ICTAIs  are  envisioned to  be a truly  public  private 

partnership. A professionally managed society / section 8 company (“ICTAI Inc.”) should be set up and 

trusted  with the  initial  contribution from  the  government. The  management  team  for  ICTAI  Inc.  should 

comprise  of  suitable  representation  from  the  government,  but  should  have  a  majority  of  independent 

private  sector  representation.  The  mandate  for  ICTAI  Inc.  would  be  to  select  the  ICTAIs  to  fund  and 

oversee their progress. In addition, ICTAIs may commission “moonshot projects” that may span across 

multiple ICTAIs or may need limited term independent project teams to be set up.  

ICTAIs are expected to leverage the strength of AI technologies to solve for application in a specific focus 

sector  areas.  Suggested  focus  sector  areas  to  begin  with,  as  identified  in  this  report,  are  Healthcare, 

 

56 

 

 

 

Agriculture,  Education,  Smart  Mobility  and  Transportation,  Smart  Cities  and  Infrastructure.  ICTAI  Inc. 

however should have the autonomy to decide on sectors to focus on and sequencing of sector selection. 

ICTAI Inc. should work proactively with private sector institutions to seek partnerships to set up the ICTAIs 

in priority domains. 

Furthermore,  ICTAIs  should  have  well-defined  linkages  with  the  COREs.  As  a  technology  feeder  for 

ICTAIs, COREs should be incentivised to commercialise their research at ICTAIs.  

The key  to success  for  the  ICTAIs  would be  their  leadership teams. The  decision on  which  ICTAIs  to 

invest  in  could  involve  believing  in  capability  and  the  vision  of  the  proposed  CEO  and  rest  of  the 

management team who have applied for ICTAI funding. Alternatively, ICTAI Inc.  may  also search and 

select a CEO and entrust her with running a particular ICTAI.  

The initial funding for a ICTAI would constitute the seed funding (in the range of INR 200 crore – INR 500 

crore per ICTAI) for first 5 years to cover the major operational expenses of the ICTAI, in addition to the 

physical  infrastructure  and  technology  /  computing  infrastructure.  The  seed  funding  should  be  a 

combination of funding from the government and private participation, preferably in equity/grant sharing 

mechanism.  Corporates  should be free  to  take a  predetermined amount  of  ownership. One corporate 

should be partnered with for each ICTAI based on a “challenge method”. The incentive for corporates to 

participate would arise from the following points that the government should endeavour to ensure: 

a)  Access to high quality training data 

b)  Computational and physical infrastructure 

c)  A  chance  for  staff  at  corporates  to  be  part  of  a  national  mission  and  work  on  challenging 

problems with a higher gestation period than traditional commercial problems 

d)  Ability to count expenditure incurred towards CSR 

e)  Boost  in  visibility  received  by  working  on  AI  for  social  good  directly  with  top  government 

institutions 

The  ICTAIs  should  raise  additional  funding  beyond  this  base  funding,  through  philanthropic  /  private 

contributions,  preferably  in  equity  sharing  mechanism  as  well.  ICTAI  Inc.  may  also  award  further 

contributions to ICTAIs based on measures of success. 

Each ICTAI should have a Governance Board, comprising of industry leaders, academic luminaries and 

global  thought  leaders.  The  CEO  and  /  or  the  industry  partner  (if  one  is  there)  may  suggest  the 

Governance  Board,  which  may  be  vetted  and  agreed  by  ICTAI  Inc.  An  industry  partner  with  sizeable 

contribution may have a reasonable say  in selection  of the Governance Board.  The responsibilities of 

Governance  Board  will  be  akin  to  a  Board  of  Directors  /  Board  of  Governors  of  any  suitably  large 

successful corporation i.e. provide overall guidance and direction, and oversee the output for the ICTAI. 

While ICTAI Inc. may lay down the success criteria for ICTAIs in general, specific targets for each ICTAI 

should be decided between the Governance Board and leadership team of individual ICTAIs. 

The  ICTAIs should  ideally  be  located  close to top  engineering  institutes  /  close to large cities,  so that 

attracting  the  best  talent  from  across  the  world  is  plausible.  ICTAIs  should  also  seek  to  leverage  the 

availability  of  students  /  research  scholars  from  the  engineering  institutes  close  to  them  for  specific 

projects etc. (through internships etc.) to build the talent pool for future. ICTAIs should aim to involve the 

successful  AI  researchers  /  practitioners  of  Indian  origin  from  across  the  world  in  either  full  time  or 

advisory capacity. If finances are a constraint for ICTAIs to attract the best talent, ICTAI Inc. may consider 

National AI Fellowships for the benefit of ICTAIs. 

 

57 

 

 

 

PRAIRIE  Institute,  recently  established  by  the  French  government  in collaboration  with academia  and 

industry, is a good potential implementational model for CTAIs. 

 14: The PRAIRIE Institute 

The PRAIRIE Institute (PaRis Artificial Intelligence Research Institute) is a collaboration of industry and 

academia supported by the French government to create an institution which becomes an international 

benchmark in AI. 

The  partners  (CNRS,  Inria  and  PSL  University,  together  with  Amazon,  Criteo,  Facebook,  Faurecia, 

Google, Microsoft, NAVER LABS, Nokia Bell Labs, PSA Group, SUEZ and Valeo) in PRAIRIE institute 

are pursuing three goals:  

• 

to  drive  progress  in  fundamental  knowledge  creation  in  AI  (AI)  freely  distributed  among  the 

international scientific community; 

• 

• 

to take part in solving concrete problems with a major application-related impact; 

to contribute to training in the field of AI. 

The  five-year  objective  is  to bring  together  AI  scientific  and  industrial  leaders  and make the  PRAIRIE 

Institute a world leader in AI.  

The aim of the PRAIRIE Institute is to act as a catalyst for exchanges between the academic and industrial 

worlds, to train new generations of researchers in AI and to play a role in leading and coordinating the 

community.  Transfer  and innovation  will  be  among its  duties,  along  with scientific  progress.  The  work 

done will highlight an integrated approach to the two traditional branches of research: 

• 

• 

upstream research, calling on partner facilities of excellence in France and abroad; 

research focusing on companies and applications, drawing on industrial partners, who are often also 

world leaders in their fields. 

Integration  between  research  topics  will  facilitate  synergy  between  the  two  branches  of  the  PRAIRIE 

Institute and will enable researchers to make the transition easily from one to the other. 

At an international level, the PRAIRIE Institute will draw on a network of partnerships with centres of AI 

excellence  to  promote  exchanges  and  leverage  impact.  Collaborative  agreements  have  already  been 

signed with the Center for Data Science at NYU, the AI laboratory of UC Berkeley (BAIR), the Robotics 

institute  at  Carnegie-Mellon  University  in  Pittsburgh,  MILA  in  Montréal,  the  Max  Planck  institute  in 

Tübingen, the CIIRC (Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics) and the Turing Institute in 

London. 

Common Compute Platform for CoEs / CTAIs 

For COREs and ICTAIs to discharge their duties effectively, pooled cloud infrastructure for AI applications 

should be made available. All the COREs and ICTAIs should be connected to the National Knowledge 

Network (NKN) and from there via a very high-speed link to a pooled cloud computing environment. This 

approach will reduce infrastructural requirements due to pooling efficiencies and reduce operational and 

maintenance costs while keeping national data secure ( 15: AIRAWAT) 

 

58 

 

 

Scope  

 

 15: AIRAWAT (AI Research, Analytics and knoWledge 

Assimilation plaTform) 

AIRAWAT will be a cloud platform for Big Data Analytics and Assimilation, with a large, power-optimised 

AI Computing infrastructure using advanced AI processing. The proposed Infrastructure will be equipped 

with  facilities  for  world’s  leading  machine  learning  including  deep  learning,  high  performance  high 

throughput  supercomputing,  infrastructure  to  store,  process,  simulate  and  analyse  big  data  sets  like 

images, video, text, sound, speech. AIRAWAT will support advancement of AI-based developments in 

image  recognition,  speech  recognition,  natural  language  processing  for  research,  development  and 

creation of varieties of new applications for the support of advancements in the fields of Agriculture  & 

Healthcare.  

Infrastructure Requirements 

1.  AI Infrastructure: High throughput processing supercomputing systems to train the machines learn 

the  data  sets  using  AI  deep  learning.  We  propose  to  set  up  a  100-AI  petaflop  computing 

Infrastructure, like the one as JAPAN’s ABCI AI Supercomputing facility.  

2.  Multi-tenant multi-user computing support through resource partitioning and provisioning, dynamic 

computing environment deployment, etc. 

3.  Energy-saving, high Teraflops per Watt per U rack space designed computing systems with low TCO 

4.  Deep  Learning  Software  stack  –  Training  and  Inferencing  development  kit,  frameworks,  libraries, 

cloud management software and portal for data labelling, data analytics, data transfer & data model 

exchanges 

5.  Low latency High bandwidth network  

6.  Mass Storage System to collect, store and share multi-petabytes of big data 

 

Utilisation 

Big data Labelling, Annotating, Anonymisation, Analytics, Skills development, job creation, support R&D, 

Academia,  startups,  entrepreneurs  and  end  users  for  agriculture  &  healthcare  advancements. 

intelligence. 

Credit: nVIDIA 

 

Pursuing excellence in research in Artificial Intelligence 

To  achieve  technology  leadership  in  AI,  India  also  needs  to  pursue  “moonshot”  projects  –  ambitious 

explorations that aim to push the technology frontier  and that would require the pursuit  of  world class 

technology  development  and  leadership  in  applying  AI  technologies  to  solve  some  of  the  biggest 

challenges. A potential project could be tested on a twin criteria of whether it is (a) a new technology or 

scientific area that has emerged or gained traction and has the capability of solving, often in new ways, 

practical problems of importance, and (b) whether it addresses emerging user needs that existing and 

available technology solutions cannot address. An example could be development of advanced natural 

language processing (NLP) infrastructure for Indian languages, with features of sentiment and semantic 

analysis, or imaging biobank for early cancer detection. 

 

59 

 

 

 

Some experts believe that such ambitious projects should be driven by the industry, since they have the 

requisite  resources,  technical  expertise  and  are  attuned  to  practical  use  cases;  and  should  rarely  be 

pushed forward by government initiatives. Google’s advances in NLP, as underlined by Duplex, is one 

such  example  of  private  sector  led  innovation  that  pushes  the  realisable  boundaries  of  technology. 

However, the inherent risk and ambition of such projects does not necessarily lay themselves well to the 

functioning and methods of most corporations. 

ICTAI Inc., the overall governing body for ICTAIs, could be the DARPA (see   16) equivalent of AI 

research in India. ICTAI Inc. should have the full autonomy on selecting the projects of importance and 

executing these projects, and should be trusted with a separate budget for pursuing such projects. Some 

of the key elements of execution include: 

a)  Projects  with  pre-defined  durations  and  tenures:  Although  ICTAIs  could  adopt  the  moonshot 

approach to select projects, the projects shall have pre-defined durations for efficient management, 

timely  realisation  of  research  deliverables  and  financial  sustainability.  The  type  of  project  could 

govern the timeline, for example a project that requires integration of existing AI technologies to solve 

a specific  problem  could  have  a  shorter  duration,  whereas  projects  which  would require  a  unique 

technological development could be allocated a timeline suitably.  

b)  Teams of contractors: Specialised teams of contractors  who have proven credentials in advanced 

technological development shall be chosen to undertake the projects. Focus could be laid more on 

the qualitative impact of past research activity, and less on the size or global recognition.  

c)  Special emphasis on selecting the right project leaders: Project leaders with the right skill sets to lead 

projects of national importance shall be key to drive the research output of projects undertaken at 

ICTAIs. They shall be people with proven capabilities in applied research, and the acumen to deliver 

technology in the form most suitable for India and the developing world.  

d) 

Independence:  Independence  to  select  projects,  design  timelines  and  deliverables  and  allocate 

budgets  shall  fall  within  the  ambit  of  the  ICTAIs  with  no  intervention  of  any  government  agency. 

Selection  of  the  project  teams  based  on  credentials  while  collaborating  with  premier  research 

institutions  with  full  independence  shall  ensure  a  robust  technological  development  that  creates 

impact. 

e)  Fail  fast  model:  ICTAIs  shall  be  given  the  autonomy  to  shut  down  projects  and  shift  resources  to 

other  operational  projects.    With  the  moonshot  approach  for  project  selection,  it  is  plausible  that 

certain research projects do not provide expected results in terms of efficiency, scalability or cost. In 

such  cases,  diverting  resources  to  other  operational  projects  with  higher  probability  of  research 

output delivery would ensure financial efficacy. 

Projects could be housed at one ICTAI, but could involve working across multiple ICTAIs and COREs.  

The  algorithms  and  data used  in an  AI  powered  application  are  key  elements  in  ensuring  operational 

success. Therefore, it is imperative that the Intellectual Property Regime in the context of AI be robust 

and enforceable for innovators to have the confidence that they will be able to make profits from and take 

credit  for  their  work.  This  is  essential  for  the  promotion  of  innovation,  entrepreneurship  and  core  and 

applied research in the field of AI. 

60 

 

 

 

 

 

However, IP in the context of AI has some key differences  with IP  in the context of generic computer 

programs or other content due to the way such algorithms are designed and trained with large datasets. 

The data fed to an  AI  algorithm during  the training step  is key  to its success.   Keeping this and  other 

issues in mind, the government may set up a task force, comprising jointly of Ministry of Corporate Affairs 

and DIPP to examine and issue appropriate modifications to the IP regulatory regime pertaining to AI. 

 16: Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 

Pentagon’s Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) was created in 1958 as response 

to increased US concerns  that Soviet Union may  have achieved technological superiority following its 

successful launch of Spuntnik. DARPA’s founding mission was simple and nimble, “to prevent and create 

strategic surprise”. 

For the past 60 years, DARPA has been the beacon of scientific breakthroughs and radical innovations. 

Amongst its success stories include the internet, RISC computing; global  positioning satellites; stealth 

technology; unmanned aerial  vehicles, or “drones. While originally created for US military, the  agency 

has played a pivotal role in giving genesis to several multi-billion dollar industries. 

What  is  even  more  impressive  is  DARPA’s  agility  and  swiftness  despite  a  small  team  and  modest 

budgetary allocations. DARPA’s total support staff is only 120 strong, and its annual budget is only USD3 

billion. DARPA accomplishes most of its programs through a “specialised project” model – assembling 

project specific teams of experts from universities, industry, government and non-profit, with well-defined 

targets and tenures. 

The three essential elements of DARPA are: 

a)  ambitious goals: the projects pursued by DARPA are designed to solve real-world problems or create 

new opportunities. The problems are such that they can’t be solved without pursuing new frontiers or 

catalysing new developments. Urgent need for application underlines the problems. 

b) 

temporary project teams: teams of world-class experts from industry and academia are assembled 

to work on well-defined projects of relatively short duration, led by accomplished technical managers. 

Given  the  intensity,  sharp  focus  and  reputation  attached,  these  projects  attract  high  caliber  talent 

who achieve extraordinary levels of collaboration. 

c) 

independence: DARPA has complete autonomy in selecting and running projects. 

 

Source: Harvard Business Review article “Special Forces” Innovation: How DARPA Attacks Problems published October 2013 

CERN for AI 

Gary  Marcus,  Professor  of  Psychology  at  NYU,  mooted  the  idea of  a  CERN  for  AI  at the  #AIforGood 

Summit in Geneva in June 2017. In an OpEd for the New York Times, Gary further elaborated on the 

idea: 

“I  look  with  envy  at  my  peers  in  high-energy  physics,  and  in  particular  at  CERN,  the  European 

Organisation for Nuclear Research, a huge, international collaboration, with thousands of scientists and 

billions of dollars of funding. They pursue ambitious, tightly defined projects (like using the Large Hadron 

Collider to discover the Higgs boson) and share their results with the world, rather than restricting them 

to a single country or corporation.” 

 

61 

 

 

 

 17: European Organisation for Nuclear Research aka CERN 

CERN,  established  in  1954  by  12  founding  European  nations,  had  its  origins  in  establishing  a  truly 

international scientific collaboration to pursue world class research in particle physics. Among the biggest 

of the several achievements to come out of this remarkable collaboration, home to the world’s biggest 

atom smasher (the Large Hadron Collider) include the development of World Wide Web and the discovery 

of the Higgs boson (the ‘God Particle’), W and Z bosons, Antimatter etc. 

CERN’s  current  21  member  states  each  contribute  to  the  overall  CERN  budget  (CHF1,240  million  in 

2013). Special contributions are made to specific projects, like Large Hardon Collider, by interested Host 

States and non-member states. The biggest chunk of CERN’s budget is spent on the construction of its 

enormous scientific installations, most of which are too expensive for a single country to afford. 

The current state of AI, which is focused on solutions to narrow applications, and grappling with questions 

around  next  phases  of  development,  ethics,  security  and  privacy  may  benefit  from  a  global  public  AI 

research institution advancing the field for the good of humanity, the “People’s AI”31.  

To achieve  #AIforAll,  which gives  the mandate for  inclusive AI  for  the  world, the Government  of  India 

should take the lead in bringing together the relevant parties to create People’s AI, the CERN for AI. India 

has a proven track record for leading projects with ambitions of greater good. India is already playing a 

leading role in climate leadership, with Hon’ble Prime Minister Narendra Modi vowing to go “above and 

beyond” India’s commitment on Paris Agreement on climate change. Similarly, India has been a pioneer 

in a sustained push for clean energy revolution by leading the International Solar Alliance, and setting an 

ambitious  target  of  100GW  of  installed  solar  energy  capacity  by  2022.  With  20GW  of  installed  solar 

capacity, India is well and truly on its way to achieving this target. With the Government of India’s focus 

on inclusive growth which saw several transformational reforms in the last few years, India is poised and 

most  suited  to  wear  the  mantle  of  leading  the  #AIforAll  movement.  Furthermore,  India  offers  the  best 

possible test bed and a plethora of use cases for building AI solutions fulfilling the inclusive AI criteria, be 

it in healthcare, education or agriculture. 

While  the  modalities  of  funding  and  mandate  for  this  #AIforAll  should  be  the  subject  of  further 

deliberations,  the  proposed  centre  should  ideally  be  funded  by  a  mix  of  government  funding  and 

contributions  from  large  companies  pursuing  AI  (GAFAM,  BATX  etc.).  Where  should  this  centre  be 

located? Nowhere and everywhere. While the CERN had the requirements of physical facilities such as 

the  Large  Hadron  Collider,  #AIforAll  could  be  distributed  across  different  regions  and  countries.  The 

Government of India, through NITI Aayog, can be the coordinating agency for initial funding and setting 

up the requisite mandates and human and computing resources.  

The mandates of the #AIforAll should include challenges of AI that are common to other countries and 

large corporations and startups alike, and the foundational components that could truly make AI inclusive 

and good for all. Suggestive technology topics could include: 

a)  General AI; 

b)  Opening the Black  / Explainable AI; 

c)  Advanced anonymisation protocols for data security and privacy; 

                                                      
31 Medium.com “The People’s AI: democratizing AI research and development” 

 

62 

 

 

d)  Ethics in AI; and 

 

e)  AI approach to solving world’s biggest problems in healthcare, education, urbanisation, agriculture 

etc. 

A start has been made by OpenAI, set up by the likes of Elon Musk and Sam Altman, with a mission to 

discover and enact the path to safe artificial general intelligence. Similarly, Declaration on Cooperation 
in Artificial Intelligence was signed by 25 states of European Union on 10th April 2018. What is needed 

though is a commitment and collaboration of truly international standards to develop and ensure #AIforAll. 

 

 

 

63 

 

 

 

 

 Skilling for the AI age 

 Getting India ready for the AI wave 

History suggests how technology has disrupted the nature of jobs and the skills required to perform them, 

requiring  the global  workforce to continuously  adapt.  Advent of AI  has accelerated this disruption to a 

pace that has not previously been seen, due to the wide range of capabilities it offers and speed at which 

it is developing. 

NASCCOM predicts that by 2022, a startling 46% of the Indian workforce will be engaged in entirely new 
jobs that do not exist today or jobs that have radically changed skill sets32. Some other sources estimate 
that demand for AI and machine learning specialists in India is expected to see a 60% rise by 201833. In 

the  data domain as  well, an independent study  estimated that India will face a  demand-supply  gap of 

2,00,000 data analytics professionals by 2020. 

In the IT-BPM sector, traditional software developer roles are set to transition to roles such as computer 

vision engineers, Robotic Process Automation (RPA) engineers and cloud architects, among others. At 

the  same  time,  completely  new  job  roles  such  as  language  processing  specialists  and  3D  modelling 
engineers are set to arise as the technologies are increasingly adopted and deployed34. With AI, such 

transition  would  move  beyond  the  IT  sector  and  affect  sectors  such  as  education,  health,  agriculture, 

finance etc, requiring the underlying skill sets.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                      
32 Future of Jobs in India: A 2022 Perspective, 2017  
33 KellyOCG, India 
34 Future of Jobs in India: A 2022 Perspective, 2017  

64 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 21: Transition in jobs and skill sets 

Source: 
Reworking 
the 
Revolution, 
Accenture 

Source: 
Future of 
Jobs in 
India: A 
2022 
Perspective, 
2017 

 

The demand for new-age jobs is accelerating in India, and can be attributed to three major factors35, viz. 

increased adoption of technology; shift in market demographics and de-acceleration of globalisation.  

 

Figure 22: Impact of primary forces on jobs in 2022 

 

As  technology  adoption  increases  across  sectors,  so  will  the  demand  for  skills  required  to  implement 

them.  India’s  growing  middle  class  and  millennial  demographic  form  a  major  part  of  the  market  for 

technology enabled products. As the size of these demographics increases, so will the demand for these 

products, and thus the workforce that can enable their creation. Increased globalisation played a major 

part in the creation of jobs in the services sector. However, as the permeation of automation increases, 

                                                      
35 Future of Jobs in India: A 2022 Perspective, 2017  

65 

 

 

 

and protectionism among previous markets for these services becomes predominant, it is important to 

recognise that these jobs will see a large overhaul.  

India may appear to be relatively well positioned to take advantage of the AI disruption by virtue of its 

advanced  IT  sector  and  large  youth  demographic  potential  to  establish  itself  as  the  future  hub  for  AI 

related activities. However, given the poor availability of qualified faculty and researchers, this advantage 

could fast transform into a liability without urgent government interventions towards promoting access to 

such skills. This is a critical component of AI development, and should be a national priority.  

Changing nature of the global service sector, uncertain impact of automation in manufacturing, and poor 

infrastructure can pose a challenge to the task of enabling up-skilling or re-skilling.  

Shifts in the outsourcing needs of developed economies have the potential to impact India dramatically. 

As multinational companies move toward ‘in-shoring’ or ‘no-shoring’ due to development of automation 

technology  and  increasingly  protectionist  measures  globally,  it  is  of  critical  importance  that  the 

outsourcing  industry  (which currently  accounts  for  roughly  15%  of  India’s  total  labour  force)  adapts  to 

these changing needs accordingly.  

Figure 23: India IT-BPM sector 

Source: 
NASSCOM, 
ICRIER, 
McKinsey 
analysis 

 

 

As indicated below, automation could affect even traditional sectors in a variety of ways. Agriculture is 

predicted to see a net decrease in jobs due to automation, while the job opportunities in the construction 

sector are predicted to improve significantly. These large scale shifts in employment depend largely on 

the  nature  of  technology  being  developed  as  well  as  deployed,  and  are  very  hard  to  predict  for  any 

 

informed policy intervention.  

 

66 

 

 

 

Figure 24: Impact of automation 

Source: 
McKinsey, 
Jobs Lost, 
Jobs 
Gained: 
Workforce 
Transitions 
in a Time of 
Automation 

 

Multiple studies have underlined the lack of employment readiness of STEM graduates, thus highlighting 

the poor standard of education in engineering colleges in India. As per some estimates, almost 80% of 

engineering graduates are unemployable on  graduation. Low  availability of specialised faculty; lack of 

flexibility  in  curriculum  revisions  in  engineering  and  computer  science  courses  to  keep  up  with  rapid 

advancements in technology; and low levels of interdisciplinary research in AI related fields to facilitate 

an AI education for non-computer science engineering (and vice versa), are just some of the factors that 

have led to this scenario.  

At the school level as well, poor outcomes in Maths and reading are particularly troubling, since these 

subjects form the foundation of knowledge required to move to an AI related education, and later jobs in 

the domain. 

Recommendations 

For addressing issues relating to skilling, a two-pronged approach is warranted, one set of interventions 

aimed at the workforce and the second for the students.  

1. Workforce 

Re-skilling of the current workforce will require integration with relevant existing skilling initiatives, building 

of  new  platforms  that  can  enable  improved  learning,  and  novel  methods  of  allowing  large  scale 

employment generation through promotion of AI.  

a) 

Incentivising creation of jobs that could constitute the new service industry: To tackle the challenge 

of  shifts  in  the  services  industry,  it  is  important  to  identify  and  promote  creation  of  jobs  that  may 

replace  traditional  IT-BPM  sector  jobs  in  the  future.  These  jobs  would  ideally  be  a  part  of  the  AI 

solution  development  value  chain,  but  require  a  relatively  low  level  of  expertise  so  as  to  create 

employment at scale. Tasks such as data annotation, for example, have the potential to employ a 

large  quantum  of  human  resources,  and  serve  countries  all  over  the  world  in  otherwise  capital 

 

67 

 

 

 

intensive projects. Tasks such as image classification or speech transcription require low levels of 

expertise  and  present  an  opportunity  to exploit  labour  cost  arbitrage  to serve companies  globally. 

Specific  policy  interventions  could be considered like tax  holidays,  inclusion under  CSR  activities, 

etc.  to  help  solve  the  dual  problem  of  workforce  job  displacement  and  creation  of  expertise  in 

fundamental sections of the solution development value chain. 

 

 18: Impact sourcing through Samasource 

Samasource is a pioneer in impact sourcing of technology services, the practice of hiring people from the 

bottom  of  the  income  pyramid  and  directly  raising  them  out  of  poverty  by  providing  digital  work  for 

companies like Google, Walmart, eBay, and many startups.  

About two-thirds of their  work is  in managed services for image capture and annotation. They  need  a 

large  pool  of  skilled,  detail-oriented  workers  to  identify  the  appropriate  images  or  video  frames  and 

manually  tag  the  scene,  specific  regions  (a  forest),  or  objects  (a  wolf)  with  the  specific  keywords  the 

customer requires for their application. 

Samasource quotes its top objective as ‘creating technology jobs for the impoverished while delivering 

the highest quality  work in a cost-effective manner’. This guided  Samasource to focus on East  Africa, 

where  the  majority  of  the  population  has  completed  secondary  or  high  school,  and  has  a  good 

understanding of basic English language. They have a dedicated training organisation that works within 

the local communities to identify qualified men, women and youth in need and assess them for key skills. 

For those with strong visual acuity, there is general computer and business skills training and a 3-week 

dedicated  machine  learning  and  image  annotation  training  track  with  example  projects  and  ongoing 

assessments that lead to graduation 

As workers get moved to projects, there is another set of qualification tests and project-specific training. 

Once they pass those, they are moved into production for the project and their work is reviewed daily by 

the QA team to correct mistakes and resolve interpretation or requirements issues (do you want to tag a 

traffic light facing away from the camera?). These reviews are done both locally and in the US, allowing 

real-time  feedback  with  many  checkpoints  throughout  the  project  lifecycle,  reinforcing  Samasource’s 

tightly managed approach to quality. 

Samasource reportedly provide jobs and digital skills training to people below the poverty line in Kenya, 

Uganda, Haiti, and India. Since the company started in 2008, Samasource has been able to hire nearly 

8,000 people. As a result, they’ve could transition themselves and their dependents out of poverty and 

provide living wages, transforming over 30,000 lives. 

b)  Recognition  and  standardisation  of  informal  training  institutions:  The  increasing  demand  for  AI  or 

data related job positions has not gone unnoticed by the Indian workforce, with a large percentage 

of them opting for training institutions to bridge their knowledge gaps. In technology hubs such as 

Bengaluru, this has led to  many  traditional IT training institutions establishing courses in new  age 

technologies. However, their standard of education is hard to assess for companies looking to hire. 

Implementation  of  recognised  certificate  courses  through  higher  education  institutions  could  be  a 

major boost to recognising resources spent on re-skilling, and holding these institutions to standards 

in  delivery  of  knowledge.  International  School  of  Engineering  (INSOFE),  for  example,  provides 

certification recognised by the Language Technologies Institute of Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) 

for a post-graduate program in data analytics and optimisation. Jigsaw Academy’s data science post-

graduate  program  gets  its  students  certified  from  the  University  of  Chicago  Graham  School. 

 

68 

 

 

 

Integration and application of existing standards such as laid out by the National Skill Qualification 

Framework (NSQF) should also be explored. Given that standards in areas such as big data exist 

but are not used by institutions for certification also highlights the need for them to be designed in 

closer collaboration with the private sector. 

 

c)  Creation of open platforms for learning: Initiatives such as the NASSCOM Future Skills Platform will 

play an instrumental role in large scale dissemination of requisite skills to some major sections of the 

employed  workforce.  Online  and  self-learning  platforms,  such  as  Coursera  and  edX,  are  able  to 

connect learners to the best universities and institutions from around the world, and can play a crucial 

role  in  this  scenario.  There  is  need  to  bring  out  guidelines  for  promoting  these  while  ensuring 

uniformity,  standards  and  usability.  As  in  the  promotion  of  MOOCs,  large  scale  deployment  and 

adoption  of  these  platforms  requires  stringent  measuring  of  quality,  and  recognition  of  their 

certification. 

 

d)  Creating  financial  incentives  for  reskilling  of  employees:  Initiatives  in  reskilling  of  employees  or 

allowing  employees  to  undergo  reskilling  initiatives  have  a  high  opportunity  cost  for  private 

companies, and may affect their willingness to let their employees engage in the process at scale. It 

is thus suggested that co-funded models between the government and companies be explored, in 

the IT sector particularly. Financial incentives for private companies could include payroll taxes which 

are dedicated to subsidising training opportunities, income tax deductions for companies participating 

in reskilling initiatives, special taxes to be paid if a minimum training budget is not disbursed, as well 

as public grants for subsidising training especially for smaller sized firms. Considering also the time 

required for reskilling, and the cost it entails to employers, financial incentives may also be tied to 

mandatory allocation of time for reskilling activities by companies for their workforce. However, in the 

absence  of  standardisation  of  training  modules  and  institutions,  such  initiatives  could  be  prone  to 

misuse. 

 

2. Students 

The  education  sector  needs  to  be  re-aligned  in  order  to  effectively  harness  the  potential  of  AI  in  a 

sustainable  manner.  In  primary  and  secondary  schools,  there  is  a  need  for  transition  to  skill  based 

education  in  subjects  relevant  to  AI.  Often  criticised  for  being  overly  knowledge  intensive,  Indian 

education  is  in urgent  need of  transition particularly  in subjects  relevant  to STEM, or  computer  based 

education. As jobs based on technology become prominent, so will the need to develop applied skills in 

a continuously changing environment.  

Increased  amount  of  project  related  work  across  education  levels,  promoting  schemes  like  the 

establishment of ATLs (Atal Tinkering Labs) in schools, necessary change  in curricula in schools, are 

some of the steps that need to be considered to promote early adoption of technology organically. 

In higher education institutions there is need for increased collaboration between industry and academia 

through  creation  of  channels  of  communication  between  faculty  and  industry  to  promote  exchange  of 

ideas  and  expertise.  Various  avenues  of  collaboration  need  to  be  explored,  including  workshops, 

incentives  for  guest  lectures  by  professionals  and  institutional  arrangements  for  regular  re-design  of 

courses in collaboration with the private sector.  

Lack of qualified faculty that poses a serious problem in the present scenario can be addressed through 

innovative  initiatives  like  credit-bearing  MOOCs  (Massive  Open  Online  Courses).  Acceptability  and 

adoption of these decentralised teaching mechanisms can be ensured through prescribed certification in 

collaboration  with  the  private  sector  and  educational  institutions.  Initiatives  such  as  the  SWAYAM 

 

69 

 

 

 

platform36, are in the right direction but these need to be further reinforced through additional investment 

and  collaboration  with  the  private  sector  and  educational  institutions  in  order  to  meet  the  market 

demand.      

Countries  like  the  USA,  that  have  a  thriving  student  and  research  community  engaged  in  AI,  have 

effective bridge courses, generally at post graduate levels for non-related fields. Thus at a post-graduate 

level, the focus shifts to creating incentives to conduct research in domestic institutions and allow cross-

disciplinary collaboration and education. Similar initiatives are required in Indian educational space with 

bridge courses in AI for post-graduates in non-computer science or data science domains to encourage 

cross-domain research and the ‘AI + X’ paradigm. One year courses could be explored that will enable 

students of a range of subjects to build foundations of knowledge in the AI space, and effectively apply 

domain expertise to solve pressing problems.  

This  is  an  ever  evolving  area  and  needs  to  go  beyond  the  one  time  solutions  with  an  institutional 

framework in place that is  responsive to changing scenarios. Such a framework would enable a more 
sustainable and customised solution. A standing committee or task force comprising of all stakeholders 
may  be  constituted  by  the  government  with  the  objective  of  examining  and  reporting  the  changes  in 

employment caused by AI in India. This taskforce would consider not only IT related activities, but the job 

ecosystem as a whole. As AI continues to evolve, this will facilitate evidence based decisions in funding 

of educational institutions, promotion of specific sectors, and channelling of human resources to be most 

efficiently utilised.  

 

                                                      
36 developed by the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and the Ministry for Human Resource Development 
(MHRD) 

70 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Accelerating Adoption 

 AI across the value  chain 

Global Context  

Adoption of AI globally is still in its nascent stages, but growing rapidly. A 2017 survey by Statista finds 

that 78% of firms globally are either using AI extensively, or have plans for use in near future. Firms in 

China and the US especially, are proactively engaging with their research communities to enable early 

adoption and position themselves competitively.  

Figure 25: Survey of global firms on adoption of emerging technologies in 2017 (In which of the 

following new and emerging technologies is your organisation making investments over the next year?) 

Source: 
Accenture 

 

A McKinsey report on “AI: The next digital frontier” concludes that AI adoption outside of the tech sector 

is at an early and often experimental stage and deployment at scale has been rare. In the survey of 3,000 

AI-aware top management executives, across 10 countries and 14 sectors, only 20% use any AI related 

technology at scale or in a core part of their businesses.  

As the field is rapidly evolving, investments made in core AI research and product development is another  

indicator of adoption. The McKinsey report estimates that organisations invested around USD26 – USD39 

billion in AI while USD6 – USD9 billion was invested in startups in the year 2016.  

Adoption of AI in India has been slow and remains limited. Estimates indicate that only 22% of the firms 
in India use AI in any business process37. Indian startups have been able to raise just USD87 million in 
2017, as against over USD28 billion raised by the Chinese startups in 201738.  

Low  adoption  of  AI  technologies  in  India  is  particularly  troubling,  given  the  country’s  prominence  in 

the global IT industry that could have given it the natural first mover’s advantage in AI. However, the IT 

industry in India has remained content in delivering traditional IT services and has been slow to adapt to 

new digital technologies compared to its counterparts in China and the US.   

                                                      
37 Intel and IDC Survey Report, dated 
38 XinhuaNet “AI sector sees big investment, financing in 2017” 

71 

 

 

 

 

 

Despite  its  sectoral  leadership  and  programming  talent,  India’s  IT  industry  with  over  USD160  billion 

annual  revenue,  has  yet  to  build  pioneering  AI  /  ML  capabilities  commensurate  with  its  potential. 

Nevertheless, the top 5 IT service companies have begun to use AI to cut costs and automate business 

processes. Wipro has built Holmes, an AI platform that deploys “bots” to carry out repetitive and mundane 

tasks. TCS has created its own AI platform, Ignio, and Infosys has built Nia, improving upon its earlier 

Mano platform. While promising, these early efforts remain far from revolutionary. 

The limited success of Indian technology players to effectively adapt and carry forward the AI revolution 

suggests  the  need  for  government  intervention  to  promote  AI  adoption,  lest  India  lose  the  chance  to 

secure  a  prominent  position  on  the  global  AI  map.  While  acknowledging  the  need  to  promote  AI, 

governments  at  different  levels,  along  with  their  various  instrumentalities,  should  adopt  proactive 

measures to accelerate AI adoption in various processes.  

The major market segments for the increased AI adoption are:  

(a)  Private enterprises: mostly driven by market and enterprise considerations, 

(b)  Public Sector Undertakings: imperative to drive up the operational efficiency of PSUs, and 

(c)  Government: improve process efficiency, reduce human discretion, eliminate middlemen, advance 

prediction, pro-active and predictive service delivery to citizens. 

The steps taken by the government, in terms of incentives or in providing infrastructural platforms, will 

have  varying  control  and  influence  on  all  these  segments  –  least  on  private  enterprises  to  most  on 

government agencies. 

AI adoption in India will face the following challenges:  

(d)  Lack of adequate talent to build and deploy AI systems at scale. An estimate claims that only 4% of 

AI professionals in India have worked on emerging technologies such as deep learning and neural 

networks. There is also a significant gap of PhD research scholars in the field. 

(e)  Difficulty  in  access  to  industry  specific  data  required  to  build  customised  platforms  and  solutions 

currently concentrated in the hands of a few major players. It is difficult for new entrants to deliver 

tailor made services that can compete with data rich incumbents such as Facebook or Google. This 

phenomenon results in the creation of a virtuous cycle which reinforces the hegemony of the big few, 

creating a huge entry barrier for startups. 

(f)  High  cost  and  low  availability  of  computing  infrastructure  required  for  development,  training  and 

deployment of AI based services. Cloud infrastructure, though growing rapidly, has limited capability. 

Also lacking are AI-as-a-service models of cloud platforms. Lack of infrastructure has led to many 

Indian AI startups to incorporate their business outside the country, which makes AI outside the reach 

of Indian researchers in government labs and many industries. Initiatives like GI Cloud (MeghRaj), 

are in the right direction.  

(g)  Low  awareness  of  AI  for  resolving  business  problems  in  most  public  enterprises  and  government 

agencies, especially given the scarcity of AI professionals, is obstructing adoption.  

 

 

 

72 

 

 

 

Following specific initiatives are recommended for promoting AI adoption in the country: 

Recommendation 1: Creating a multi-stakeholder Marketplace 

To encourage the development of sustainable AI solutions at an appropriate price point for sectors such 

as health, education, and agriculture, it is necessary that a level playing field be ensured and a supportive 

environment  be  created  for  all  players  in  the  value  chain.  The  development  of  any  working  AI-based 

product is a long process with very different specialised activities that are necessary for final delivery, just 

like any other product or service value chain. 

Figure 26: AI Value Chain 

 

It is exceedingly difficult for a small or medium business / startup to vertically integrate all these processes 

and have the internal capacity to deploy them simultaneously before even entering the market. Therefore, 

this acts as a barrier to entry for new players. On the other hand, for different firms to take up different 

activities  and  still  deliver  useful  products,  a  strong,  stable  price  discovery  mechanism  has  to  exist  for 

incentives to align and sustainable business models to come up for the different parts of the value chain. 

Another  well  documented  and substantial  barrier  to entry  is  the difficulty  of  acquiring  the raw  material 

(data) in the first place since as noted above, most usable data is in the hands of a few players. 

Towards  providing  a  level  playing  field,  addressing  information  asymmetry,  and  incentivising  and 

simplifying collaboration between the various stakeholders in the AI ecosystem, a marketplace may prove 

to be a potent tool provided it enables the following:  

(a)  Discovery  of  required  AI  component:  ability  to  reference  assets,  be  it  data  or  ML  models,  and 

services, such as annotation, and enable curation and rating of these assets. 

(b)  Platform to execute transactions: with mechanisms to exchange value of a specific good and service 

for currency or subscription models for APIs. 

(c)  Verification of transactions: ability to verify the occurrence of transactions and the receipt of goods or 

services in exchange for currency.  

Such a marketplace model would benefit by: 

a)  Reducing asymmetry of information: With a reasonable volume of transactions, aberrations caused 

due to data oligopoly  will reduce, thus reducing the spread in pricing and effectively  incentivising 

both data owners and AI model creators. 

b)  Encouraging specialisation in different niches by firms and creation of novel business models: Easy 

availability  of  raw  components  required  at  different  stages  of  the  AI  solution  development  cycle 

would allow firms to focus on specific problems, rather than attempt to build capability across the 

value chain. For example, a new segment of startups could entirely focus on the problem of curating 

raw  data  to  be  put  on  the  marketplace,  rather  than  attempting  to  do  all  the  above  at  once. 

 

73 

 

 

 

Consequently,  such  startups  will  see  a  better  market  for  VC  funding  as  they  will  be  able  to 

substantially mitigate their business risks, if an easily accessible, formal market for raw data exists.  

c)  Unlocking  new  sources  of  data  and  enabling  more  efficient  use  of  computational  and  human 

resources: Estimates suggest that only 1% of data today is analysed due to its existence in various 

unconnected siloes. For example, medical imaging / diagnostic centres today are collecting valuable 

data. It is currently not used to its potential as there is no way for diagnostic centres to build predictive 

disease  models  without  hiring  AI  experts,  renting  computational  expenditure,  and  indeed  shifting 

gears  completely  to  become  an  AI  company.  In  the  presence  of  a  formal  market  with  a  fair 

mechanism of price discovery, such diagnostic centres would have an incentive to collect this data, 

have  it  curated,  and  place  this  data  in  the  market  with  appropriate  permissions  and  safeguards. 

Concurrently, machine learning experts in AI firms would be more productive as they could focus on 

the problem of creating the model rather than that of sourcing the data and curating it.  

d)  Address ethical concerns regarding data sharing: Today, transactions and buying of data occur in 

an  informal  marketplace.  However,  there  is  no  mechanism  currently  to  ensure  that  appropriate 

permissions are taken from the actual data owners before data custodians share the data. Going 

back to the example of diagnostic centres (which are data custodians in this case), it would become 

necessary for firms to take consent of individuals getting imaged to aggregate and sell their data. 

This could create mechanisms through which individuals are ultimately compensated. In this way, 

the informal market for data could be nudged towards entering the formal economy. 

Recommendation 2: Facilitating creation of large foundational annotated data sets 

In  India,  lack  of  annotated  data  in  the  domestic  context  has  emerged  as  a  major  impediment  in 

development of AI solutions for both startups and core research alike. Availability of general data corpora 

which can be applied across product functions can serve to provide a ready source of data (in ‘plugin’ 

mode) to startups and enable solutions customised to the Indian context. There is evidence to suggest 

that ready availability of large corpora can spur research and innovation in the field of machine learning. 

Figure 27: Breakthroughs in AI 

By  its  very  nature, this  task  is  laborious  and  despite innovations  in automatic  annotation, such as  the 

development  of  GoogleNet  object  classification,  human  annotation  and  training  of  data  sets  are  not 

 

74 

 

 

 

 

 

expected  to  be  replaced  in  the  near  future.  This  is  best  exemplified  by  the  thriving  investments  and 

startups in this area. As lately as 2017, Alegion, Scale, CloudFactory, Mighty AI, and CrowdFlower, all 

companies  that  enable  human  intervention  to  data  annotation,  have  received  about  USD50  million  in 

investment funding.  

Given the nature of this task, it is necessary for the government to explore assistance in building of large 

corpora of data across domains, as a means of laying the foundation for startups and enterprises to build 

applications and services which are tailor-made to the Indian context, and in the process lowering entry 

barriers for startups and academia while also encouraging international expertise to focus on problems 

in the Indian context.  

In areas such as native language NLP (Natural Language Processing) for diverse Indian languages, for 

example, the funding for creation of these data sets can add incremental value to existing services across 

many domains, ranging from e-commerce to agricultural advisory. Co-funding by the government would 

also enable enforcing of standards across development of data sets, and allow interoperability at a large 

scale.  A  collaborative  approach  where  the  government  acts  as  a  catalyst  is  recommended  as  a  way 

forward.  

Recommendation 3: Partnerships and collaboration 

AI  is  a  highly  collaborative  domain,  and  any  framework  aimed  at  promoting  AI  needs  to  be  aligned 

accordingly.  A  multi-pronged  approach,  involving  various  stakeholders  and  promoting  a  collaborative 

approach is required for promoting development of AI tools as well as adoption of AI in different fields of 

activity. 

Perkmann and Walsh (2007) studied different degrees of partnership in research and categorised them 

in three categories, each having different characteristics. 

Figure 28: Categories of partnerships in Research 

In India, Academic Entrepreneurship is being taken up through mechanisms such as the development of 

dedicated e-cells in institutions such as IIT Bombay, IIT Madras and IIM Ahmedabad, among others. Low 

degrees of partnership, such as direct transfer of knowledge, is being taken up by MNCs and startups 

that make use of scientific publications and informal interaction to develop. Research partnerships are 

 

75 

 

 

 

 

also being explored, but in a very limited capacity. Other partnership mechanisms, however, are all but 

absent.  

(h)  Collaboration  between  Research Organisations  is  required  to promote  the  ‘AI+X’  paradigm  where 

the AI researcher works in close collaboration with the researcher in other domains like healthcare, 

manufacturing,  agriculture,  etc.  Several  successful  US  universities  have  co-located  departments 

which  enabled  close  collaboration.  DARPA  in  the  USA  has  close  linkages  with  research  facilities 

housed  in  academic  institutions,  and  has  taken  up  major  initiatives  for  promoting  research  and 

innovation in collaboration with private enterprises and startups alike. In India these domains are not 

naturally connected, primarily due to the structural nature of both academia and research labs.  To 

promote AI in the country, and fully realise the ‘AI+X’ paradigm, it is also necessary to enable such 

cross-sectoral collaboration, e.g. between a medical doctor and a computer scientist, to lead research 

for application of latest technology in solving medical problems and also making real data available 

in the process. 

(i) 

Industry-Research  Collaboration  is  required  to  help  continuously  scale  and  improve  the  initial 

research  output  based  on  user  feedback  from  the  market.  For  example,  in  the  domain  of  search 

engines, several search datasets like TREC, SMART, etc. were made available by the US universities 

during the 1970-80s to develop the technology of information retrieval and search. This in turn led to 

development of several search engines such as Yahoo! and Alta Vista during this period. Over time, 

this led to improved smarter systems until Google became the market leader in the late 1990s. 

(j)  Collaboration  with  trade  bodies  and  Venture  Capitals  is  essential  for  successful  functioning  of  a 

profitable business which involves various other elements, like deriving the optimal business model, 

managing human resources, advertisement / marketing and many varied functions depending upon 

the type of technology and underlying business. Trade bodies and associations are very important 

for  collaborating  with  other  people  in  similar  businesses,  as  they  can share  information  about  the 

common problems, possible solutions and access to learning from the ground. Such bodies help in 

collectively  identifying  new  international  markets  for  such  products  /  technologies  and  in 

lobbying/negotiating for favourable trade norms with the national and international bodies. 

Recommendation 4: Spreading awareness on the advantages AI offers 

Another  major  hurdle  in  adoption  is  low  visibility  for  the  work  being  done  across  the  country.  Unless 

known through networks, work is often duplicated without knowledge of previous work done in the area 

and consultation with experts. There is a need for an AI Database on an online portal for registered people 

to access and find this information. This database, primarily managed by the government, could serve as 

a single source of truth for experts and projects being implemented. The resources can include details 

like researchers  stating  their  expertise,  and  professionals  with  hands-on  experience on  developing  AI 

solutions showcasing their credentials. This knowledge base can also become a forum for sharing various 

discussion related to research collaboration, and finding relevant collaborators and finding professionals 

to deliver on AI projects. 

There is need to make senior level officials among government agencies, public sector undertakings, and 

other domestic firms aware of the numerous advantages that AI offers, by organising workshops and live 

demonstrations  of  possible  AI  applications  and  how  its  implementation  can  help  augment  the  human 

workforce,  rather  than  displace  it.  The  constitution  of  an  annual  ‘AI  Readiness  Index’  may  also  be 

considered, as highlighted in the DIPP Task Force report on Artificial Intelligence. This may also be further 

expanded to highlight best  practices across states, to be  shared  in various fora. NITI Aayog, given its 

mandate of competitive and cooperative federalism, could undertake this task. It has already collaborated 

 

76 

 

 

 

with organisations such as Google to organise capacity building training and workshops for government 

functionaries.  

Recommendation 5: Supporting startups 

Startups and smaller firms are the engine for growth in a dynamic evolving economy like India, and are 

constrained in the AI space, thus requiring targeted government interventions.   

(a)  Incubation hubs specifically for AI startups in collaboration with State Governments and private sector 

stakeholders need to be set up to provide space, and other infrastructure facilities for new  startups 

to incubate along with interacting with other startups at various levels of maturity in order to interact 

and provide advice.  

(b)  Establishment of fund to provide grant funding to startups to facilitate their operation and business. 

This  should  be  aimed  at  assisting  startups  to  sustain  the  initial  years  of  business  when  they  are 

unable to generate venture capital funds or have to sacrifice a large share of the business for early 

stage seed funds.  

Proposed modules of the National AI Marketplace (NAIM) 

It is  proposed  that the marketplace,  called here as  National  AI  Marketplace (NAIM),  be  divided into  3 

distinct modules, at least in early stages of development. These are as follows: 

a)  Data marketplace 

b)  Data annotation marketplace 

c)  Deployable model marketplace / Solutions marketplace 

The AI development value chain, discussed above, is supported by these three modular marketplaces in 

terms of easing collaboration, reducing time and cost of collecting & annotating data, and bringing multiple 

solutions deployment at one place for scale and network effect.  

Figure 29: Enablers for AI value chain 

The  marketplace  mechanism  being  proposed  here  will  be  aimed  at  easing  the  adoption  efforts  of  all 

participants – private enterprises, PSUs, governments, startups and academia. A common platform which 

brings together enterprises and AI solution builders will trigger off the initial collaboration towards building 

AI solutions and adopting them at scale. 

 

 

 

77 

 

 

 

Figure 30: Stakeholders for the proposed NAIM 

 

Data marketplace 

Today, incumbents continue to enjoy an oligopoly in building sustainable business models in AI for two 

main  reasons:  (a)  they  can  successfully  buy  data  in  the  informal  market  setting  due  to  availability  of 

resources  and  reach  to  negotiate  one-time  contracts  continually,  and  (b)  they  have  specialised 

departments to work on different facets of the development value chain. In the process of informal data 

acquisition as well, there is no proper price discovery mechanism in place. Compounded with the issue 

of a huge asymmetry of information in the sector between data providers and buyers, data providers are 

likely to be substantially underpaid.  

This further compounds the problem of data access and thwarts the creation of a healthy marketplace as 

well as incentives. In a formal marketplace being proposed here, new entrants in the AI model creation / 

training space will find it easier to raise resources for buying data. This will be due to VCs having enough 

information to verify the funding demands and a lower risk resulting from a more level playing field and 

equitable access to new data sources. 

While data has been compared to oil ad nauseam, there are a few differences which must be highlighted: 

a)  Reusability:  Copied  data  is  as  valuable  as  the  ‘original’.  Therefore,  traceability  of  ownership  is  a 
challenge for a viable marketplace model where the originators of the data should get compensated 
from resale of the data. 

b)  Compounding  value:  Unlike  oil,  the  value  of  a  dataset  increases  not  just  with  quantity  but  also 
structural  complexity.  For  example,  the  value  of  a  health  dataset  of  a  million  individuals  and  an 
education  dataset  of  the same individuals  is  more  than  the  sum  of  its  parts  because of  the  value 
added by the connections between the different elements. Therefore, it is difficult to quantify the value 
of new datasets as it is dependent on the existing datasets one has and how one plans to connect 
the new data with the existing data. 

 

78 

 

 

 

 

c)  Permanence: Unlike the oil, the inventory of data continually increases with time. However, this raises 

the complexity in transporting larger and larger datasets. 
 

d)  Ubiquity:  Since  data  is  ubiquitous  and  continually  increasing  in  quantity,  it  follows  that  a  way  to 
automatically  curate  new  datasets  is  needed  so  that  any  market  does  not  overwhelm  users  with 
outdated or irrelevant data. 

 

The fundamental properties of data and its collection outlined above create challenges which make the 

creation  of  a  centralised  data  marketplace  difficult.  The  primary  assumption  of  a  data  marketplace  in 

operation is that data custodians will share the data on the marketplace. Organisations may be reluctant 

to do so. Further, the operations of the data exchange, financially sustained by transaction fees and rigid 

pricing models, also add to inefficiencies and discourage data sharing.  

Features of a viable data marketplace – how it can be implemented? 

To incentivise a larger supply of AI training data sets and services, it is necessary to ensure availability 

of data, an audit trail mechanism to curb reselling of the same data, and ways to address security and 

privacy concerns. One solution is to have a centralised, trusted party to host the data on behalf of data 

providers and enforce the rules of the game. However, this is not practical for a variety of reasons, not 

the least because most data providers will not agree to let a replicable resource such as data be stored 

somewhere else, but also because of cost, control and trust concerns. 

A more effective way to address these concerns is a decentralised data marketplace that is based on 

blockchain technology.  

The exchange platform should have the following features for data providers to share data: 

a)  Traceability, 
b)  Access Controls,  
c)  Compliance with local and international regulations, and 
d)  Robust price discovery mechanism for data 

 

The proposed data exchange marketplace will attract data providers and model builders / trainers to build 

AI products. The process of exchange, with enforced provisions of privacy and anonymisation, brings a 

market determined value to data and thus forces the existing informal data exchange economy, without 

any privacy protection, to move towards a formal economy.  

The  government  can  establish  a  committee  of  experts,  researchers,  AI  developers  and  regulators  to 

create the standards the data marketplace will adhere by and explore how can it be put in implementation.  

The unique approach that one such initiative, i.e., Ocean Protocol has taken is to create what they call a 

Proofed Curation Market with two subcomponents: (a) Data exchange validation on blockchain, (b) Data 

curation  market  based  on  a  derivative  token.  The  former  lays  out  a  mechanism  for  data  and  value 

exchange, the latter enables the market to decide which datasets are important and creates an incentive 

for even free data to be put on the platform. Essentially, data consumers can bet on the viability of even 

free data and thereby earn money. 

See Appendix III for more on data ecosystems as enablers. 

Data annotation marketplace 

Of the three marketplace modules defined, the data annotation marketplace is perhaps the most mature.  

 

79 

 

 

 

Given the large costs associated with the annotation exercise, a popular mechanism that has emerged 

is that of crowdsourcing using un-trained or non-expert anonymous annotators on the internet. Though 

this gives rise to its own set of challenges, it may be considered a solution to the problem of cheaply and 

quickly  acquiring  annotations  for  the  purposes  of  constructing  a  variety  of  models.  To understand  the 
potential  of  crowdsourcing,  consider  the  observation  of  a  research  paper  in  200439:  a  crowd  of  5,000 

people  playing  an  appropriately  designed computer  game  24  hours  a  day,  could be made to  label  all 

images on Google (425,000,000 images in 2005) in a matter of just 31 days.  

However, some challenges that emerge in the annotation crowdsourcing process are as follows. 

a)  Creation of verification mechanisms: Dependence on untrained professionals gives rise to issues in 
ensuring high accuracy in annotation and thus potentially higher accuracy of the trained algorithm. 
Verification mechanisms such as multiple annotation, verification of samples by trained professionals, 
etc. are some of the ways to solve this problem. 
 

b)  Establishing verified traceability: Mechanisms must thus be put in place to identify poor annotators, 

and create mechanisms to reduce the effect of error generated. 

 

Features of a data annotation marketplace – how it can be implemented? 

Platforms such as Amazon’s MTurks, Figure-Eight (previously known as CrowdFlower) or ClickWorker 

are  perhaps  the  most  popular  crowd-sourced  annotation  platforms.  Each  allows  for  building  of 

mechanisms of verification such as multiple annotations, creation of test cases, sample verification by 

professionals, etc. to increase accuracy of annotations.  

Analysis indicates that most annotation tasks can be categorised on the basis of sensitivity to expertise 

of  annotators.  This  is  defined  as  the  degree  to  which  annotator  expertise  can  affect  the  accuracy  of 

annotation.  The  figure  below  considers  how  approaches  to  the  annotation  process  could  differ  with 

changing nature of the task.  

Figure 31: Approaches to annotation 

Sensitivity to 
degree of expertise 

Example of task 
 

Motivation 
 

Potential 
annotators 

Verification mechanism 
 

Low 

High 

Classification of 
object in 
presented image 

GWAP, ML, 
ALTR 

General 
population 

Multiple annotations 

Classification of 
medical scans 

ML 

College students, 
professionals,  

Multiple annotations, 
Verification by professionals 

GWAP = Games with a purpose, ML = Mechanised labor for financial incentives, ALTR = Altruistic motivation 

Simple object classification or regional language translation are examples of tasks that have low barriers 

to  annotator  expertise.  However,  tasks  such  as  classification  of  medical  images,  requires  robust 

mechanisms to verify annotations, and also ensure verified traceability to identify poor annotators, and 

create mechanisms to reduce the effect of error generated.  

In  India,  vast  public  datasets  are  available  at  organisations  such  as  ISRO  (India  Space  Research 

Organisation), ICAR (Indian Council of Agricultural Research), All India Radio (AIR) and NIC (National 

                                                      
39 Luis von Ahn and Laura Dabbish, 2004, Labeling images with a computer game 

 

80 

 

 

 

Informatics Center) among others, but are unfortunately largely unused due to lack of proper annotation, 

prohibitive  cost  associated  with  the  process,  and  lack  of  proper  mechanisms  for  acquisition.  It  is 

envisaged that these datasets be used to create initial corpora of datasets,  and  encourage  enterprise 

action in the area. A crowdsourced platform for annotation, on the lines of the highly popular government’s 

citizen participation platform myGov.in, can be established by the government (to be operated by a private 

player) where seed data for annotation can be provided by the organisations mentioned above.  

Deployable Model Marketplace 

Given the level of market for AI tools, AI-as-a-Service business model, and a plethora of standardised 

problems faced by enterprises at scale, a deployable model segment in the marketplace, which brings 

together the buyers and suppliers of AI solutions, can greatly ease and expedite the adoption of AI. It 

would give visibility to the existing solutions, address information asymmetry and generate awareness 

amongst  the  relevant  constituents.  This  AI-as-a-Service model  segment  would  further  build  upon  and 

synergise with the previous two layers of the marketplace model viz. data and annotation. 

Many  objectives  aimed  to  be  achieved  by  AI  algorithms  can  now  be  categorised  as  standardised 

problems. The following  are some of the standardised and ubiquitous problems most of organisations 

face in their activity streams: 

language recognition and transcription; 

a)  object detection in images or video streams; 
b)  conversational smart chatbots (text and speech); 
c)  speech-to-text and text-to-speech; 
d)  assistive diagnostic solutions; 
e) 
f)  contextual data mining to discover complex patterns; 
g)  price optimisation; 
h)  data collection, curation and annotation for specific business use; 
i)  supply and demand forecasting; and  
j)  server, app and web uptime/downtime prediction. 
 

Here models refer to the weights of the AI model trained on the data, which contains the predictive power. 

The inferencing of the model will require integration with other IT stacks and will be a customised process. 

Hence, this module of the marketplace should focus on defined deployable models that can be bought or 

sold. These models could either be bought and sold as data, or more likely, as a service or an API layer 

that can be charged per use. 

The model marketplace will attract enterprises which can post problems which they  are seeking to be 

solved  using  AI  tools.  Governments  can  be  another  party  to  announce  specific  problems  which  they 

intend  to  be  solved.  This  demand  side  will  be  supported  by  the  community  of  AI  solution  developers 

(consisting of startups, enterprises, individual researchers etc.) who  will either showcase their existing 

developed  and  tested  product  suites,  or  customise  their  products  as  per  the  demand  placed  by 

enterprises. Academic researchers will be another major beneficiary of the marketplace as they will get 

valuable insights about problems faced by the industry and will get access to real industry data.  

 

 

 

 

 

81 

 

 

 

Figure 32: Stakeholders of NAIM 

 

Challenges to adoption of a marketplace model for AI models are as follows: 

a)  Ensuring  quality:  Marketplaces  require  continuous  monitoring  and  maintenance  of  quality.  For 

example, Amazon enforces this on vendors, and this goes beyond user ratings. Continuous scrutiny 

of products, sellers and buyers will be required. 

b)  Responsive product development required: The correct set of features of this platform will have to be 

discovered through iteration and adaptation, since there isn’t precedent of such AI platforms to draw 

from.  The  platform  should  allow  for  trial  based  access  to  models  to  allow  for  iterative  product 

evaluation by buyers. 

c)  Sophistication of PSUs for data sharing and evaluation against specs: If data is to be provided over 

the  platform,  solution-seekers  will  need  to  know  how  to  provide  clean  datasets,  balance  data  to 

sufficiently represent infrequent occurrences, hide test data for evaluation of solutions while sharing 

training data, define appropriate specs, decide on appropriate evaluation methods, etc. The platform 

should be able to prescribe some basic standards for data sharing which will allow  non-ML savvy 

PSUs to post problems and data. 

d) 

Incentives  for  seeding  network  effect:  The  marketplace  needs  a  certain  critical  mass  of  solution 

seekers and providers for gaining traction, to subsequently trigger network effects. This is true of all 

marketplaces.  Incentives  to attract  both  seekers  and  providers  initially  will  need  to be  figured out. 

PSUs and government agencies may act as initial seeders/users of the platform with right incentives 

and mandates.  

e)  Potentially rich feature set needed for adoption: Such platforms can work well when there are systems 

like a credible rating  system,  payment  escrow,  search and sort  to  aid  discovery,  recommendation 

engines, etc. These will need to be established at NAIM also.  

How can the stakeholders engage in NAIM? 

NAIM,  as  a  marketplace  for  enterprises,  will  encourage  all  business  entities,  government  agencies, 

startups,  AI  researchers,  system  integrators  and  academic  research  institutions  to  sign  up  on  the 

platform. Following may look like a snapshot of the marketplace where all the stakeholders engage in 

their respective activities on the platform: 

 

82 

 

 

 

Private / public sector enterprises 

a)  Hospitals: assistive diagnostics for physicians and radiologists. 

b)  Distribution companies: predict peak load, identify default prone customers. 

c)  Travel  and  tourism:  predict  peak  traffic  routes,  pricing  optimisation  customers,  offer  alternative 

routes/modes for traffic optimization. 

d)  Large industrial or real estate establishments: smart power management, utilities management, real-

time failure detection and analysis. 

e)  Cinema: automated subtitles in regional languages (speech-to-text and translation). 

Government authorities 

a)  Traffic  authorities  and  police:  real-time  object  detection  in  CCTV  video  feeds,  face  detection  and 

object tracking, number plate detection. 

b)  Citizen  engagement:  conversational  chatbots  (speech  and  text)  in  Indic  languages  for  grievance 

redressal and query management. 

c)  Document  analysis  and  management:  text  recognition  and  sentiment  analysis  from  physical 

documents, analysis and summary. 

d)  All India Radio and Prasar Bharti: speech-to-text services for transcription and analysis. 

e)  Road and rail transport: face and eye movement detection (at the edge) for analysing driver fatigue 

and alarm signal, freight route optimization. 

f)  Agriculture:  crop  health  and soil  health  analysis  through  remote  sensing and  IoT, farmer  advisory 

services for input control and market demand prediction. 

AI Solution Providers  

a. 

India  AI  startups:  solutions  for  natural  language  processing  and  Indic  languages,  diagnostic 

assistants, image recognition/object detection. 

b. 

Industrial Internet-of-Things: capturing data from machines and providing insights in areas of energy 

management, retail and inventory management. 

c.  On Edge AI devices: CCTV video feed monitoring and warning signals. 

d.  Academic Research Institutions. 

e.  Centers of Excellence: access to industry data for various use cases, model training and evaluation. 

 19: Why the focus on PSUs 

Private enterprises run on the basis of market conditions and business drivers of revenues and profits. 

Due to either absence of markets or failure of efficient markets, many sectors of operation of PSUs are 

for achieving socio-economic goals of equality and distribution of wealth. There is not much incentive for 

PSUs for improving operational efficiency; they are further constrained by regulations imposed on publicly 

funded entities in activities of procurement, manpower hiring etc.  

Technology  adoption,  especially  AI,  can  significantly  improve  operational  efficiency  and  drive  down 

operational costs incurred by PSUs operating in financially unsustainable but socially critical areas. This 

 

83 

 

 

 

improvement in operational costs will make them financially more viable. The NAIM allows the public-

sector firms to directly scout for solutions which they can use in their business operations by significantly 

easing their information search for solutions. Additionally, PSUs and government agencies can also be 

the first driver of the network of the NAIM where initial pool of problems and industry data is shared by 

them which will attract several solution developers, especially startups and researchers to sign up for the 

platform. 

Mechanisms to realise marketplace model 

It is proposed that a decentralised data marketplace based on distributed ledger technology be set up. In 

the future, such a platform can enable advanced privacy preserving AI techniques such as multi-party 

computation directly on individual pieces of data. 

Instead  of  attempting  to  build  such  marketplaces,  which  it  is  not  equipped  to  do  so,  the  government 

should come out with enabling regulations, such that these marketplaces can be set up by private players. 

These would include regulations and standard permissions for any personal data being sold, standards 

for  anonymisation,  standards  for  ensuring  annotation  accuracy,  and  cybersecurity  standards  for  the 

module dealing with deployable models.  

An  initial  effort  may  be  made  by  the  government  to  build  the  NAIM  platform  where  all  relevant 

stakeholders can sign up. However, open market competition will allow other marketplace operators to 

come in with innovative services and up-to-date data on suppliers and buyers on the marketplace. NAIM 

will lead to a more engaging collaboration, quicker and easier data access and accelerated adoption of 

AI among enterprises and public authorities in the country.  

 

 

84 

 

 

  

 

Ethics, Privacy, Security and Artificial 

Intelligence 

 Towards a “Responsible AI” 

 

AI  is  going  to  be  the  tipping  point  in  technological  evolution  of  mankind,  with  human  dependence  on 

machines and algorithms for decision making never  been such deep. Thus, any strategy document on 

promoting AI, necessarily needs to be conscious of the probable factors of the AI ecosystem that may 

undermine ethical conduct, impinge on one’s privacy and undermine the security protocol. Appropriate 

steps to mitigate these risks need to be an integral part of any such strategy.  

While the issue of ethics would concern the biases that an AI system can propagate, the privacy concerns 

are largely on collection and inappropriate use of data for personal discrimination. Issue of security arises 

from the implications and the consequent accountability of any AI system. 

While  addressing  the  above  issues,  one  needs  to  be  conscious  of  the  potential  vulnerabilities  of  our 

extant regulatory and societal structures which are dependent on human judgment and control, and thus 

subject  to  inherent  biases  and  discrimination.  Thus,  to  say  that  extant  decision  making  systems  – 

individual, societal, regulatory  or even judicial  –  are  entirely  devoid of these shortcomings  would be a 

fallacy  as  these  are  dependent  upon  human  limitations  of  knowledge,  precedent,  rationale  and  bias 

(explicit or subconscious). Delegation of some aspects of that decision making to algorithms, which may 

well be able to ingest and process many more parameters as compared to a human, may likely result in 

systems  with  reduced  bias,  discrimination  and  improved  privacy  protection.  However,  even  if  a 

technological intervention helps us delegate that responsibility to an algorithm with improved outcomes, 

it is extremely important that we set much higher standards for privacy and protection in case of AI tools. 

Ethics and AI 

Fairness / tackling the biases AI 

Based on the premise that a large set of well-diversified data may be an accurate description of the world, 

most of the developer community takes a technocratic attitude that data-driven decision making is good 

and algorithms are neutral. However, this  argument does not recognise the fact  that the existing data 

may have biases, which may have got reinforced over  time. The issue of fairness is at the forefront of 

discussion  in  academic,  research  and  policy  fora,  and  definitely  merits  a  combined  dialogue  and 

sustained research to come to an acceptable resolution. One possible way to approach this would be to 

identify the in-built biases and assess their impact, and in turn find ways to reduce the bias. This reactive 

approach, use-case based, may help till the time we find techniques to bring neutrality to data feeding AI 

solutions, or build AI solutions that ensure neutrality despite inherent biases. 

Transparency / opening the “Black Box” 

Presently, most AI solutions suffer from what is commonly known as the “Black  Phenomenon”, with 

very little or no understanding of what happens in between and only the input data and results being the 

known  factors.  This  is  due  to  the  reliance  in  most  current  AI  systems  to  incrementally  improve  the 

performance as defined by a narrow set of parameters, with developer’s emphasis being less on how the 

 

85 

 

 

 

algorithms  are  achieving  the  requisite  success.  However,  calls  for  explaining  the  decision-making 

process  will  gain  momentum  as  AI  systems  are  increasingly  relied  upon for  decision  making  that  has 

significant consequences for a large section of population.  

Opening the Black , assuming it is possible and useful at this stage (there is considerable debate on 

that as well), should not aim towards opening of code or technical disclosure – few clients of AI solutions 

would be sophisticated  AI  experts  - but should rather aim at “explainability”. With extended disclosure 

though, what needs to be balanced is whether the algorithm’s parameter may induce the individuals and 

companies to change their behavior and in turn game the system. Clearly, more collaborative research 

is required in this area.  

 19: Decoding Explainable AI 

Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) is an evolving area of research which has received a lot of attention 

from the research community and the broader society alike. XAI project by DARPA is one such project 

which has shown substantial progress in explaining how and why machine learning algorithms work in a 

certain way. The aim of the XAI project, as described by DARPA is: 

The Explainable AI (XAI) program aims to create a suite of machine learning techniques that: 

•  Produce more explainable models, while maintaining a high level of learning performance; and 

•  Enable  human  users  to  understand,  appropriately  trust,  and  effectively  manage  the  emerging 

generation of artificially intelligent partners. 

The machine  learning  algorithms  of  tomorrow  should  have the  built-in capability  to explain  their  logic, 

enumerate their strengths and weaknesses and specify an understanding of their future behavior.  

Figure 33: XAI Concept 

XAI is one of a handful of current DARPA programs expected to enable “third-wave AI systems”, where 

machines understand the context and environment in which they operate, and over time build underlying 

explanatory models that allow them to characterise real world phenomena.  

In May 2018, XAI researchers are expected to demonstrate initial implementations of their explainable 

learning systems and conduct pilot studies of their Phase 1 evaluations. Full Phase 1 system evaluations 

 

are expected in November 2018. 

Credit: DARPA Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) 

 

86 

 

 

Privacy and AI 

 

AI  models,  solutions  and  their  application  depend  on  generation,  collection  and  processing  of  large 

amounts of data on individual, entity and community behaviour. Data collection without proper consent, 

privacy of personal data, inherent selection biases and resultant risk of profiling and discrimination, and 

non-transparent nature of AI solutions are some of the issues requiring deliberation and proper recourse.  

However, the current debate on data usage have two  distinct aspects. Firstly, there are concerns that 

companies  are  harvesting  significant  amounts  of  consumer  data  and  using  it  inappropriately  to  gain 

insights about consumers. Key here is that the consumer may not have access to these insights or the 

ability to derive value from them. Beyond compliance, companies can consider how to create awareness 

of how they use consumer information and the value they provide in return, which can build trust in their 

brand and services. 

Secondly, there are concerns that companies are amassing large data sets and thereby building an unfair 

competitive  advantage.  Datasets  themselves  have  little  intrinsic  value  without  the  ability  to  extract 

meaning from them. The dataset is a necessary, but not the only, component of delivering meaningful 

insights from data. Having the tools to analyse it and the experience to understand its meaning are the 

others. While those that have access to large datasets and by the nature of their business models have 

data  network  effects,  which  enables  them  in  turn  to  build  a  first  mover  advantage  when  it  comes  to 

perfecting their algorithms and driving business value, this  does  not  necessarily  negatively  impact the 

consumer. 

Dealing with privacy issues 

a.  Establish  a  data  protection  framework  with  legal  backing:  The  work  being  done  by  Justice 

Srikrishna Committee on data protection law is very opportune and timely. The 7-core principles 

of  data  protection  and  privacy  –  informed  consent,  technology  agnosticism,  data  controller 

accountability,  data  minimisation,  holistic  application,  deterrent  penalties  and  structured 

enforcement – are quite comprehensive and should provide a strong privacy protection regime 

in the country once enacted.  

b.  Establish sectoral regulatory frameworks: Apart from having a central privacy protection law, due 

to diverse and fast changing nature of the technology, sectoral regulatory frameworks may also 

act as additional protection to user privacy and security. Japan and Germany have developed 

new frameworks applicable to specific AI issues such as regulating next generation robots and 

self-driving cars respectively.  

c.  Benchmark  national  data  protection  and  privacy  laws  with  international  standards:  European 

Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)  guidelines,  which have been enforced  in 

May  2018,  encourage  design  of  less-privacy  invasive  systems.  French  laws  give  a  right  to 

explanation for administrative algorithmic decisions, making it much more comprehensive than 

GDPR on administrative decisions. India’s privacy protection regime will have to be continually 

updated to reflect understanding of new risks and their impact.  

d.  Encourage  AI developers to adhere to international standards: Leaders and  practitioners from 

across the world have come together to frame standards for safe and privacy preserving AI. The 

Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems of the IEEE has a chapter on 

‘Personal Data and Individual Access Control in Ethically Aligned Design’. Indian enterprises and 

developers need to build these standards into AI design itself. 

e.  Encourage self-regulation: Data Privacy Impact Assessment Tools can be used by AI developers 

and enterprises adopting AI solutions to manage privacy risks.  

 

87 

 

 

 

f. 

Invest  and  collaborate  in  privacy  preserving  AI  research:  New  mathematical  models  for 

preserving  privacy  are  being  researched  upon  where  risks  of  data  exploitation  and  personal 

identification (from an anonymised dataset) can be reduced by limiting information one can gain 

from released data, irrespective of amount of side information available otherwise. India should 

collaborate on areas of research like Differential  Privacy,  Privacy  by Design, Safety-Critical AI 

and Multi-Party Computations which enable protection of privacy despite data sharing at a wide 

scale.  

g.  Spread awareness: Privacy has been termed as a fundamental right by the Supreme Court of 

India.  The  protection  of  this  right  with  its  multiple  facets  in  a  fast-changing  technological 

environment will not just depend on State enforcement but by also making the citizens aware of 

their rights and how they can protect them.  People often unknowingly give consent to sharing 

their data which they would not have ordinarily done had they known the purpose their data were 

being  put  to.  There  is  an  urgent  need  to  spread  awareness  among  the  individuals  about  the 

importance of consent, ethics and privacy while dealing with technology. A pan-India campaign 

in multiple languages, and inclusion of privacy rights in school and college curriculum can serve 

as effective mass outreach mediums to spread awareness. 

 20: Differential Privacy 

A concept developed by Cynthia Dwork in 2006, Differential Privacy aims at preserving identifiable user 

information irrespective of any outside information the aggregator agency holds. The dilemma of giving 

personalised service to users based on their individualised preferences while at the same time ensuring 

that user is not uniquely identifiable, using the data collected or any other public data, is not solved by 

traditional privacy preserving methods of cryptography. Differential privacy describes a promise, made 

by  a  data  holder,  or  curator,  to  a  data  subject:  “You  will  not  be  affected,  adversely  or  otherwise,  by 

allowing  your  data  to  be  used  in  any  study  or  analysis,  no  matter  what  other  studies,  data  sets,  or 

information sources, are available.” It addresses the paradox of learning nothing about an individual while 

learning useful information about a population. 

Security in AI 

The accountability debate on AI, which in most of the cases today is aimed at ascertaining the liability, 

needs  to be  shifted  to  objectively  identifying the component  that  failed and how  to prevent  that  in the 

future. An analogy can be drawn to how the airlines have become a relatively safe industry today. Every 

accident has been elaborately investigated, and future course of action has been determined. Something 

similar is needed to ensure safe AI. 

One possible framework that can be mooted involves the following components:  

a.  Negligence test for damages caused by AI software, as opposed to strict liability. This involves 

self-regulation by the stakeholders by conducting damage impact assessment at every stage of 

development of an AI model.  

b.  As an extension of the negligence test, safe harbours need to be formulated to insulate or limit 

liability so long as appropriate steps to design, test, monitor, and improve the AI product have 

been taken. 

c.  Framework for apportionment of damages need to be developed so that the involved parties bear 

proportionate liability, rather than joint and several liability, for harm caused by products in which 

 

88 

 

 

 

the AI is embedded, especially where the use of AI was unexpected, prohibited, or inconsistent 

with permitted use cases. 

d.  Actual harm requirements policy may be followed, so that a lawsuit cannot proceed based only 

on a speculative damage or a fear of future damages. 

India can also take a leaf out of UK’s playbook, where GBP9 million is being invested to establish a new 

Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation, aimed at enabling and ensuring ethical, safe and innovative uses 

of data, including AI. This will include engaging with industry to explore the possibilities of establishing 

data trusts to facilitate easy and secure sharing of data. A consortium of Ethics Councils at each Centre 

of Excellence may be set up to define the standard practice (on the lines of OpenAI charter). It would be 

expected that all Centres of Excellence adhere to standard practices while developing AI technology and 

products. 

 

 

 

89 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Actions for the Government 

Achieving the goal of #AIforAll requires long term and engaged institutional collaboration between all 

the stakeholders including the citizens. However, while playing the primary role in ensuring that this 

collaborative strategy succeeds, the government needs to be mindful of not crowding out the private 

sector. Role of the government thus needs to be one of a facilitator, an active promoter and wherever 

required, of an owner.  

This section summarises the key recommendations, and the role of the government. 

Figure 34: Government’s role 

Area 

Recommendation 

Government role 

Research and Application 

Core Research  Setting up Centre of 

Research Excellence for 
AI (COREs) 

  PhD Scholarships 

 

Inter-academia 
collaboration  

Identify academic institutions, provide fiscal 
support to establish COREs focusing on core 
technology research in AI. 

Institute National AI Fellowships to retain 
outgoing PhD students and attract researchers 
from foreign universities with attractive 
incentives and challenging projects. 

Incentivise research collaboration between 
premier academic institutions through special 
grants while facilitating the formation of a global 
expert pool for core AI research. 

  Faculty Fellowships 

Provide Faculty Fellowships or Chairs in 
academic institutes to promote research in AI. 

Applied Research   Setting up of 

International Centres for 
Transformational AI 
(ICTAIs) 

  Setting up ICTAI Inc., 
overarching entity for 
ICTAIs 

Common Compute 
Platform 

Setting up AI Research, 
Analytics and 
knoWledge Assimilation 
platform (AIRAWAT) 

Invite Expression of Interests (EoIs) from 
industry players to lead ICTAIs in various 
sectors (health, education, agriculture, smart 
mobility and smart cities), in collaboration with 
the government and academia. Build  
governance structure, provide fiscal support, 
formulate an IP model for ICTAIs and set up the 
ICTAIs under a PPP model through “challenge 
method”. 

Establish “ICTAI Inc.” as either society / section 
8 company, with initial contribution from 
government and private sector representation, 
to select and fund ICTAIs. 

Set up a common cloud platform for Big Data 
Analytics and Assimilation with a large, power-
optimised AI Computing infrastructure 
connecting all COREs, ICTAIs and other 
academic institutions with National Knowledge 
Network. 

Intellectual Property  Building an attractive IP 
regime for AI innovation 

Set up a task force, comprising jointly of Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs and DIPP, to examine and 

 

91 

 

 

Supra-national 
collaboration 

Setting up CERN for AI 

 

issue appropriate modifications to the IP 
regulatory regime pertaining to AI. 

Take the lead in bringing together the relevant 
parties to create People’s AI, the CERN for AI – 
national governments, industry, academia and 
international community of researchers. 

Reskilling and Training 

Workforce  Promote formation of 
future service sector 
jobs 

Incentivise creation of service sector jobs of the 
future such as data annotation through tax 
holidays or inclusion in CSR activities. 

  Recognition and 

standardisation of 
informal training 

Set up AI / Data Science training standards, as 
per National Skills Qualification Framework, and 
provide certifications to training institutes. 

  Promote employee 

reskilling 

Incentivise investment in training of employees 
through tax breaks and grants for employers. 

Colleges  Expansion of quality 

education in data 
science and AI 

Incentivise colleges / universities to adopt 
credit-bearing MOOCs in their curriculum. 

  Promote cross-

disciplinary AI education 

Introduce Bridge Courses in AI for post-
graduates in non-computer science or data 
science domains. 

Schools 

Introducing AI / ML in 
schools 

Overall  Continuously assess the 
changing nature of jobs 

Introduce AI modules in Atal Tinkering Labs. 

Constitute a standing committee or taskforce to 
examine and report on changes in employment 
induced by adoption AI. 

Accelerating Adoption of AI 

Data Sharing  Opening up government 

datasets 

Establish platforms for making datasets in the 
area of social sector (either collected during 
implementation of a scheme or in normal 
business processes) available for open public 
use in a machine readable form.  

Data Annotation  Creating and making 

1.  Catalyse partnerships with the various 

India specific annotated 
datasets public (on the 
lines of ImageNet) 

Crowdsourcing 
Annotation 

Annotation of data – 
images, text, speech 
etc. via crowdsourcing 

academic institutions and public / 
private agencies in making annotated 
India specific data available for 
advancing AI research. 

2.  Explore partnerships and co-fund 

building of large corpora of data across 
domains, as a means of laying the 
foundation for startups and enterprises 
to build applications and services tailor-
made to the Indian context. 

Announce grand challenge tasks for tagging of 
images, text or videos, and devising reward 
based mechanisms through data market place 
to aggregate the content from the various 
participating members. 

Nation-wide 

adoption 

Enabling a multi-
stakeholder owned and 

Create governance guidelines, explore 
partnerships and co-fund the establishment of: 

1.  Data marketplace 

 

92 

 

 

 

managed National AI 
Marketplace 

2.  Data annotation marketplace 
3.  Deployable model marketplace 

Visibility in 
Collaboration 

Making information 
search for collaborations 
easier 

Awareness and 
Adoption in 
Government 

Making decision makers 
aware about 
transformative potential 
of AI 

Government and 
PSUs as seeders for 
network effect 

Making governments 
and PSUs leaders in 
adoption of social AI 
tools  

to develop the data supply ecosystem, ease 
collaboration, reduce time and cost of collecting 
& annotating data, and bring multiple solutions 
deployment at one place for scale and network 
effect. 

Set up an AI Database portal for easy 
dissemination of information on projects being 
implemented via collaboration among 
government-academia-industry-researchers-
startups to enable resource matching. 

1.  Workshops, live demonstrations, 
2.  AI Readiness Index to highlight best 

practices across states, and 

3.  Create Central-State shared fund for AI 
led development projects to be taken up 
by States. 

Help create a pipeline of AI research projects for 
the COREs, ICTAIs through grand challenges to 
be given by the government and PSUs. 
Incentivise public agencies to adopt and employ 
AI in delivering service through financial 
support; extra budgets for R&D; tax incentives 
and awards. 

Partnerships and 
Collaboration 

Industry – Academia – 
Trade Bodies – Venture 
Capital Collaboration 

Encourage close collaboration between 
industry, academia, trade bodies and venture 
capital to implement “AI+X” paradigm. 

Startup Support  Support systems for AI 

based startups 

Establish incubation hubs and venture funds 
specifically for AI startups in collaboration with 
State Governments. 

Responsible AI Development 

Ethical and 
Responsible 
Research in AI 

Making COREs and 
ICTAIs adopt ethical 
practices 

Set up a consortium of Ethics Councils at each 
CORE and ICTAI to define the standard 
practices and monitor their adoption. 

Privacy and Security 

Instituting a data privacy 
legal framework 

  Creating sectoral 

regulatory guidelines 

Address and implement data protection 
framework, which protects human rights and 
privacy without stifling innovation in India. 

Collaborate with industry to come out with 
sector specific guidelines on privacy, security 
and ethics – on manufacturing, financial 
services, identity, telecommunication, robotics 
etc.  

  Collaborating on privacy 

preserving technology 
research in AI 

Support COREs to do research in new 
mathematical models and technology for 
preserving privacy; encourage international 
collaboration. 

Sustainable 
Research 

Setting up Centre for 
Studies on 
Technological 
Sustainability (CSTS) 

Set up CSTS to address issues relating to 
ethics, privacy, legal aspects, social 
sustainability and global competitiveness of the 
technologies developed.  

 

 

93 

 

 

 

Financial implication of recommendations 

A greater understanding of the financial implications of the recommendations made in this report will be 

realised after consultations with the different stakeholders. Given the emphasis on research, skilling 

and creation of the ecosystem, the recommendations would involve a significant budgetary allocation 

by the government. This would be in addition to funds being provided as part of the Digital India and 

Startup India initiatives. 

 

 

 

94 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

95 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

96 

 

 

 
