ai.italia.it
#AItaskforce

ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE

at the service of citizens

White Paper on Artificial Intelligence at the service of citizens

By the Task Force on Artificial Intelligence of the Agency for Digital Italy

Version 1.0 March 2018

ai.italia.it

  

Contents

Making the most of artificial intelligence in Italy and Europe
A new common culture for the innovation of public services 
For those who do not have time: Summary of the White Paper 

ITALY AND DIGITAL SERVICES
Introduction 
An overview of digital government in Italy
The Italian digital strategy
Project sheets of the three-year plan

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TODAY
The main application areas
The potential of AI in Public Administration
Hypothetical scenario 

THE CHALLENGES OF AI AT THE SERVICE OF CITIZENS
Challenge 1: Ethics
Challenge 2: Technology
Challenge 3: Skills
Challenge 4: Role of data
Challenge 5: Legal context
Challenge 6: Accompanying the transformation
Challenge 7: Preventing inequalities
Challenge 8: Measuring the impact
Challenge 9: The human being

RECOMMENDATIONS 
And now? The first steps for an AI-ready PA

APPENDIX 
Summary of technical terms
Bibliography

P. 04
P. 05
P. 06

P. 11
P. 12
P. 13
P. 15
P. 17

P. 20 
P. 24
P. 27
P. 30

P. 32
P. 34
P. 38
P. 44
P. 48
P. 51
P. 53
P. 58
P. 62
P. 65

P. 68
P. 71

P. 74
P. 75
P. 77

Making the most of artificial intelligence in Italy and Europe

Artificial Intelligence, or AI, is one of the most promising technologies of our times - from 
saving lives to online shopping predictions and raising crop productivity.
That  is  not  an  exaggeration:  AI  can  already  help  doctors  to  identify  cancers  and  other 
diseases, thereby prolonging human life.
In the future, it could be used to predict and locate earthquakes. Italian startups already 
provide AI-based services, such as detecting transaction fraud.
AI stands to benefit society as a whole, across all sectors, for people going about their 
everyday lives as much as for business. 
That also applies to government and public administrations: the focus of this White Paper 
published by the Agency for Digital Italy.
It identifies some main areas where AI can help – in health, education and judiciary systems; 
in public employment and security.
The  Agency’s  paper  takes  a  welcome  look  at  how  governments,  public  agencies  and 
administrations can best use AI technologies to serve both people and business, to raise 
the efficiency of public services as well as user satisfaction.
Much of what AI can achieve in public administration chimes with the European Commission’s 
promotion  of  e-government  and  digitised  public  services  as  part  of  building  the  Digital 
Single Market:

- saving time and public money, providing better public services.
- joining them up across borders, raising efficiency and improving transparency.
- bringing people closer to their governments; involving them more in decision-making.

Developing and promoting AI will be very much a European, not just a national project.
It is an opportunity that Europe, collectively, should not hesitate to grasp firmly.
To that end, we will need an open and inclusive debate that involves all our countries on how 
best to use these new technologies: how to respect fundamental rights such as privacy, 
liberty, security and non-discrimination.
This paper already shows how Italy’s efforts in AI are a good example for other countries to 
emulate – and how they can help in Europe’s broader reflections on the way ahead.

4

Andrus Ansip

Vice-President of the European Commission for 

the Digital Single Market

5

A new common culture for the innovation of public services 
 
Artificial Intelligence will redesign our lives. Our daily lives of human beings, citizens, workers, 
parents, and children are changing before everyone’s eyes. Indeed, we can be sure that 
our customs will soon be reshaped consequently generating social changes that require 
an individual and collective reflection and in some cases, perhaps, even an upset reflection.
Technology is neutral in itself but it is not so in its application and it is even less neutral for 
those who, working on the development of societies, often find themselves deciding what 
is right or wrong or, in a given context, what is the best good or the least harm.
The  spirit  with  which  the  Agency  for  Digital  Italy  has  undertaken  this  commitment  is 
summarized in these few lines.
The aim of the pages that will follow the preface of this White Paper is the study, analysis, 
and the  understanding of the opportunities and risks generated by the dissemination of 
Artificial  Intelligence  technologies  in  the  public  sector:  hence,  the  definition  of  a  shared 
perimeter within which to face all the challenges that this brings. 
This document marks the beginning of a journey that the Italian Public Administration has 
already started: in recent months, we have created a community with which we have worked 
to draw the working lines that could help us define the approach to Artificial Intelligence in 
Public Administration that we will undertake to transform into the operational steps as of 
today.
However, it is at the end of this first phase of study, analysis, and comparison that I am further 
confident that, never as in this case, a platform that connects the public administration to 
the markets was extremely needed to have a frame value. Having clear ideas on the model 
of  technological  development  and  with  a  vision  capable  of  contrasting  the  apocalyptic, 
exclusionary and non-governed scenarios.
A reflection that, in addition to being the leitmotif of the White Paper, moves from the 
clear awareness that public administration needs - for the sake of its decisions - to be 
competitive on these issues, without hiding. Today, more than ever, those who understand 
and govern the phenomena that surround it continue in the path of innovation; those who 
are affected will lose ground.
This  is  why  the  work  just  begun  becomes  a  prerequisite  to  face  the  use  of  frontier 
technologies that allow the administration to capitalize on the innovation introduced by the 
infrastructural projects already underway and, starting from them, allows organizing the 
model of development of its future projects.
The  recommendations  published  in  this  document  are  aimed  to  become  design  criteria 
for  new  services  and    methodological  assets  to  guide  the  creation  and  development  of 
pilot projects. In addition, the recommendation will also serve for the innovative result of 
the technologies that will be implemented and for the common value approach. Only by 
following this path we will succeed in relating the benefits of Artificial Intelligence in the 
daily “practice” of citizens.

Antonio Samaritani

Director General of the Agency for Digital Italy

For those who do not have time:
Summary of the White Paper 

6

This White Paper  aims at analysing the impact of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in our society and, 
more specifically, in the Public Administration, in order to promote digital transformation. It 
is the result of the work of the Agency for Digital Italy and with a task force of experts.
The  objective  is  to  facilitate  the  adoption  of  these  technologies  in  the  Italian  Public 
Administration,  to  improve  services  to  citizens  and  businesses,  thus  giving  a  decisive 
impulse  to  innovation,  the  proper  functioning  of  the  economy  and,  more  generally,  to 
progress in daily life.

Today, Artificial Intelligence can drive vehicles, take care of elderly or sick people, perform 
dangerous  or  weary  jobs  and  help  make  informed  decisions  based  on  the  rational 
management of large amounts of data. Also, AI can enable us to communicate in languages 
we do not know, help us study and increase the cultural or entertainment experiences at our 
disposal. In the Public Administration, it can be used profitably in the healthcare, education 
and judiciary systems, public employment, security and, more broadly, in the management 
of relations with citizens, which can be simplified and at the same time be more effective, 
quick, and efficient.

As prerequisite to achieve these objectives is necessary to define “Artificial Intelligence”, 
from both a theoretical and a technical point of view. This serves to understand opportunities 
and limits of these technologies, as well identify their most effective areas of application. 
The White Paper focuses on tools that can have positive effects on the work of the Public 
Administration, such as the use of chatbots to answer citizens’ queries and cut through 
layers of bureaucracy, or the use of robots to take care of the sick, algorithms that can read 
results of medical exams and these that support the preparation of educational path of 
students in order to improve their performance. Particular emphasis is placed on the means 
for monitoring and managing careers, those for the surveillance of public places or for the 
recognition of network threats, as well on tools for the rational management of problems 
generated by natural disasters.

The successful implementation of these technologies in public services requires the public 
sector to evaluate the critical challenges that must be faced to integrate Artificial Intelligence 
in a profitable way. 

The first challenge is the Ethical challenge,  which remains central to any consideration 
in this field. There is a need to strongly affirm the anthropocentric principle stating that 
Artificial Intelligence is always at the service of the citizen and not vice versa.

Executive summary

Moreover, it is necessary to formulate general principles of equity with the aim of using 
these  new  technologies  to  address  some  universal  needs  such  as  to  respect  freedom, 
and to guarantee individual and collective rights. More specifically, in the field of ethics, 
the functioning of Artificial Intelligence raises some issues, i.e. those related to the quality 
and neutrality of data, the responsibility of those who use algorithms, transparency and 
accountability, as well as protection of privacy.

The aim is to demonstrate how the incorrect use of the technologies at our disposal can 
contribute  to  the  development  of  a  more  unjust  society  that  fuels  inequalities,  while 
awareness  of  the  risks  involved  in  relying  on  “smart”  machines  can  help  us  minimize 
inequalities and plan a better world.

The second challenge that is addressed is the technological one: Artificial Intelligence is 
not yet able to reproduce the complex functioning of the human mind, but only some of 
its  circumscribed  capacities.  Therefore,  one  of  the  goals  is  to  make  existing  and  future 
technologies more similar to our way of relating to the world.
In the short term, the priority is to work on personalization and adaptivity to ensure that 
data and algorithms at our disposal can be increasingly more effective in allowing us to 
operate individually in some specific areas of our daily life. For the purpose of this White 
Paper, the focus is on rendering more effective the work of the Public Administration (in 
addition to the sectors mentioned above: tax, mobility and transport).

The document then analyzes the fundamental issue of skills that must be developed in 
the age of Artificial Intelligence. The issue is addressed from both the citizens’ and the civil 
servants’ points of view. Citizens in general, and primarily those who would like to operate 
in the IT sector, need to understand how algorithms and databases that are used by the 
Public Administration, civil servants need to constantly ameliorate their skills.

However, even for those who want to engage in other sectors, it will be necessary to know 
how to act in contexts that will increasingly assign to machines tasks that were previously 
performed  by  people  (typically,  the  simplest  and  most  repetitive  ones).  This  challenge 
underlines  the  importance  of  understanding  how  to  relate  with  machines  and  coexist 
with them in a world that is always more populated by technology. The State bears the 
responsibility to respond to these needs by both shaping an education system able to keep 
up with these changes and encouraging lifelong learning.
However, in order to achieve these goals, civil servants and people employed in the public 
sector must be properly trained. They will face the need to understand what are the Artificial 
Intelligence tools they need to integrate into their work processes and which ones they can 
use with citizens. In this sense, a properly trained Public Administration can become a real 
propeller of innovation.

7

Executive summary

The fourth challenge is related to data which are the fuel of Artificial Intelligence.
First of all, these must be of good quality, exempt as much as possible from biases produced 
by humans. Biased data can easily influence algorithms. This is why is critical to secure a 
right organizational methodology and create the best conditions in the contexts in which 
the data is produced. This is also true for data collected by IoT devices and sensors that are 
fragmented, heterogeneous and not highly interoperable, despite being connected to one 
another.

Furthermore,  there  is  the  so-called  linked  open  data  of  public  bodies,  a  real  mine  of 
information that would be very useful to generate applications of Artificial Intelligence at 
the service of the citizens. However, they must first be retrieved and filtered by means 
of semantic technologies and shared ontologies. Lastly, precisely for this kind of data, we 
highlight the need to ensure equal and non-discriminatory access to anyone wishing to use 
it.

The  fifth  challenge  is  the  legal  one.  As  always,  when  it  comes  to  how  to  regulate  the 
activity of the public administration, it is focused on the balance between the interests of 
the community and those of the individual. In the field of Artificial Intelligence is necessary 
to  reconcile  the  principle  of  transparency  of  administrative  acts  and  procedures  or  the 
protection of personal data with the right to privacy. A second issue that the public sector 
has to face is the relationship between the necessity of guaranteeing transparency in the 
context  of  algorithmic  decision  making  and  protecting  the  copyright  of  the  creators  of 
the algorithms. Moreover, in the event that the public administration uses programs that 
help the decision-making process, or programs able to take autonomous decisions, it is 
necessary to face the issue of accountability.
The White Paper addresses all these issues and provides some technical solutions that are 
also included in the European Regulation on the protection of personal data (GDPR), which 
will become effective in all EU countries on May 25th 2018. In general, the principles to be 
followed are: the transparency of algorithms and related databases, the definition of the 
connected responsibilities of users and the need to prevent that the use of data in the Public 
Administration generates a pervasive social control, in contrast with the fundamental rights 
of the citizen.

The sixth challenge falls directly under the responsibility of the Public Administration as it 
is linked to the adoption of AI technology in the public sector, for instance to improve the 
relationship between the State, citizens and businesses. As anticipated in the third challenge, 
the White Paper underlines the importance of training public employees, particularly officials 
and managers, on the functioning, benefits, as well as ethical and technical implications on 
the use of AI technologies in the public sector.

8

Executive summary

The basic principle is that Artificial Intelligence should support people and help them carry 
out their activities, without replacing them. 

This last point anticipates the theme of the seventh challenge: preventing inequalities.
Indeed, Artificial Intelligence solutions must be accessible to everyone and it must be of 
simple and immediate use.
This kind of technology can reduce social inequalities in the field of education and training, 
health and disability, knowledge and human rights. However, Artificial Intelligence can also 
increase inequalities, if the data it feeds on or the algorithms that make it up are affected 
by discriminatory bias.
Therefore,  the  Public  Administration  must  pay  great  attention  to  the  development  of 
inclusive, accessible, transparent, not discriminatory and free from bias solutions.

In order to verify the actual benefits deriving from the use of Artificial Intelligence in the
Public Administration, the eighth challenge is connected to the measurement of the impact 
of AI technology. Once again, the challenge is presented from the point of view of 
both citizens and institutions. In the first case, the focus is on improving people’s quality of 
life and customer satisfaction; in the second case, on rendering the organizational processes 
more efficient and effective.
In  this  section,  emphasis  is  placed  on  the  necessity  to  conduct  both  multidisciplinary 
quantitative  and  qualitative  research.  Indeed,  the  impact  of  technology  on  citizens  and 
institutions has different facets, including economic, technical, social, cultural, psychological 
and  anthropological  factors.  These  variables  are  not  always  measured  by  the  Public 
Administration,  however,  the  introduction  of  Artificial  intelligence  in  the  public  sector  is 
such a sensitive issue that requires an attentive impact assessment. 

The last challenge, the human being, is linked to the development of a discourse around 
Artificial Intelligence. Indeed, citizens and Institutions should be aware of the significant 
importance of these tools. To this end, experiments are proposed in the fields of design, 
arts,  psychology,  anthropology  and  sociology  that  can  close  the  gap  between  research, 
industry, and society.
Artificial Intelligence represents simultaneously a technological and a social innovation that 
can radically transform our world.

Taking this into consideration, the White Paper includes a set of recommendations drafted 
by the Agency for Digital Italy, the Task Force and a community of more than 500 experts 
and citizens. The objective is to share the recommendations with the readers in order to 
raise  a  long  lasting  discussion  that  should  accompany  the  processes  of  development, 
modernization and improvement of the State and our society.

9

Executive summary

10

Eudaimonia (gr. εὐδαιμονία,  lett. “being in the company of a good demon”), as illustrated by 
Aristotle, defines human well-being as the highest virtue for a society. Eudaimonia can also 
mean  “prosperity”,  as  it  denotes  an  overall  condition  of  well-being  in  which  human  beings 
perceive their benefits starting from the conscious contemplation of ethical considerations that 
help us define how we wish to live.
Whether our ethical substratum is Western (Aristotelian, Kantian), Oriental (Shinto, Confucian), 
African  (ubuntu)  or  attributable  to  any  other  tradition,  creating  autonomous  and  intelligent 
systems that explicitly respect the inalienable human rights and cultural values of users, it is 
possible to give priority to the improvement of human well-being as a parameter for progress in 
the “algorithmic age”. Recognizing the potential of a holistic approach, prosperity should in this 
way become more important than the pursuit of one-dimensional objectives such as increased 
productivity or a country’s GDP growth.

Source: The IEEE Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems_, 2017, IEEE - Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers
Ref. (https://standards.ieee.org/develop/indconn/ec/ead_executive_summary_v2.pdf)

Italy and digital services

The measure of intelligence is the ability to change
Albert Einstein 

Introduction

Italy and digital services

It takes something more than intelligence to 
act intelligently.
(Fëdor Dostoevskij)

The aim of this White Paper is to analyse the impact of Artificial Intelligence (AI) on our 
society and, specifically, how these technologies can be used by Public Administration (PA) 
to improve services for citizens and businesses. All of this is part of a broader scenario 
of reflection on the policies to be implemented to facilitate the digital transformation, the 
engine of social, the economic and the cultural development.
To accelerate this transformation process, it is possible to draw inspiration from international 
experiences that have brought tangible results: Italy must excel in the search for innovative 
strategies, perhaps able to feed on the historical, cultural and social wealth of the country 
and the Mediterranean, and at the same time, succeed in seizing the best that has emerged 
from the strategies of those countries that were the first in making the evolution of public 
information technology the lever for transition to a new global structure of the economy 
and society.

12

THE KEY WORDS OF DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION

CONNECTIVITY

DIGITAL PUBLIC 
SERVICES

HUMAN CAPITAL

Ref. DESI 2017

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY

USE OF INTERNET

European average
Italy

It  is  therefore  necessary  to  support  the  country’s  innovation  forces  in  order  to  obtain 
increasingly competitive models and to initiate a radical change in the relationship between 
citizens, administrations and the market. The ultimate goal of this process is the creation of 
modern, easy to use, accessible and high-quality public services therefore oriented, to the 
understanding of users’ needs thus, allowing the level of citizen satisfaction and trust in the 
institutions to be increased.
The document intends to outline the development prospects of digital public services and 
the challenges that the country will have to face to implement and use the new technologies 
while respecting ethics and laws, putting the citizen at the centre of this evolutionary path.

An overview of digital government in 
Italy

Italy and digital services

Before describing the state of the art and the future prospects of Artificial Intelligence in 
our society and in Public Administration, it may be useful to analyse what is happening in 
the field of digital transformation in the public sector, in order to understand the current 
situation and imagine how AI can create synergies with the process of digitising the country.

According to data reported in the last Report of the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD) on Digital Transformation1, our country is 
in 5th place worldwide for the production of the most cited scientific documents 
on  machine  learning  after  the  United  States,  China,  India  and  Great  Britain 
(science, innovation and digital revolution). 
Also in the same Report (section on growth, work and digital transformation), 
2015 data on the dissemination of industrial robots show that Italy is among the 
leading economies in Europe (behind Germany, Czech Republic, Slovak Republic 
and Slovenia) in terms of use of robots (ex. number of robots compared to the 
value added in manufacturing), while showing indices equal to 1/3 compared to 
those of the world leader (South Korea). 

13

As the Digital Economy and Society Index - DESI 20172, Italy is growing, but there is still a 
gap between the supply of digital services and their actual use. Our country has nevertheless 
made  progress  on  connectivity,  a  basic  condition  to  allow  the  development  of  a  digital 
ecosystem, thanks also to the Ultra Broadband Plan3.
According to the data of the Annual Report of the Authority for Communications Guarantees 
(AGCOM),  at  present  90.7%  of  families  with  at  least  one  minor  have  a  fixed  and  mobile 
broadband connection, a figure that stops at 20.7% for families with members aged over 65. 
At the same time, 91.6% of households with at least one graduate member have a broadband 
connection, a figure that falls to 55.3% for families in which the highest education is junior 
high school. 

90,7% 90.7% BROADBAND 

CONNECTION IN FAMILIES 
WITH AT LEAST ONE MINOR

91,6% BROADBAND CONNECTION IN 

FAMILIES WITH AT LEAST ONE 
GRADUATE

1 OECD Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard 2017, Ref. Highlights relativi alla Digital Transformation in Italia: https://www.oecd.org/italy/sti-scoreboard-2017-italy.pdf. 
2 Ref. https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/desi. 
3 Ref. bandaultralarga.italia.it.

Italy and digital services

This, once again, highlights the centrality of demand, and not just supply, in stimulating the 
dissemination of internet-based technologies in Italy.

Confirming the importance of the “demand factor” are data on the Italian dynamism of start-
ups and innovative small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). In our country, according 
to a census updated to 20174, they are about 8,000, twice the number compared to 2015, 
employing 46,107 people, including shareholders and employees. 

The digital market is growing and the ICT sector is undergoing a development phase thanks 
to the increase in investments: in 2016, it grew by 1.8% to reach Euro 66 billion in turnover5. 
As  too  is  the  demand  for  high-level  digital  skills,  in  a  context  in  which  only  29%  of  the 
workforce possesses them compared to the EU average of 37%6.

As for digital public services, as the DESI again confirms, Italy is positioned at the top of the 
ranking in terms of quantitative supply but has low percentages of use by the population. 

14

THE DIGITAL MARKET IN ITALY

INNOVATIVE START-UPS 
AND SMES

8.000

46.107

PEOPLE EMPLOYED

TURNOVER

66 MLD

29%

WORKERS WITH 
DIGITAL SKILLS

Source: “Annual Report to the Parliament Start-ups and innovative SMEs” Mise, 2017 and “Digital in Italy: markets, dynamics, policy 2017” Assinform, 2017

Also  Eurostat  partly  confirms  this  fact:  a  more  streamlined  relationship  with  the  Public 
Administration7, when this is made possible, the tools made available are used by only 13% 
of citizens compared to a European average of 30%8.

4 Ref. Annual Report to Parliament on the state of implementation and the impact of policies in support of Start-ups and Innovative SMEs”, Mise, 2017.
5 Ref. “Digital in Italy: markets, dynamics, policy 2017”, Assinform, 2017.
6 Ref. note 1.
7 Ref. “E-Government benchmark 2017”, European Commission, 2017.
8 Ref. http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/digital-economy-and-society/data/main-tables.

The Italian digital strategy

Italy and digital services

In the context of the European Digital Agenda9, Italy has developed its national strategy by 
converting the EU objectives into initiatives aimed at the digital transformation of public 
administration10. In so doing, the interventions in the public sector become the driving force 
for business development and the growth of citizens’ skills. The 2014-2020 strategy of 
the Digital Agenda has therefore become a veritable tool to pursue the great objectives of 
growth, employment, quality of life and democratic participation.

But the challenges of digital transformation have changed quickly: Internet of Things (IoT), 
big data analytics, Artificial Intelligence and Blockchain are the vectors through which the 
new digital economy moves.

15

FROM DIGITAL AGENDA TO THREE-YEAR PLAN

Y
T
I
R
U
C
E
S
R
E
B
Y
C

ECOSISTEMI

INFRASTRUTTURE

IMMATERIALI

INFRASTRUTTURE

FISICHE

M
O
N
I
T
O
R
A
G
G
O

I

THE STRATEGY APPROVED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT

THE STRATEGIC MODEL OF 
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION 
OF THE PA

THE THREE-YEAR PLAN 
DEFINES THE OBJECTIVES TO 
BE REACHED

Also to address these issues, in 2017 the three-year plan for information technology in 
the Public Administration11 was approved, which contains operational indications (actions, 
times and objectives) for the development of four pillars: digital ecosystems or policy areas 
(health,  school,  justice,  etc.),  immaterial  infrastructures  (that  include  enabling  platforms 
and data of the PA), physical infrastructures and cybersecurity. 

9 The European Digital Agenda, launched by the European Commission in May 2010, has precisely defined the objectives for developing digital economy and culture in Europe within 
the framework of the Europe 2020 strategy.
10 The main objectives are: centralizing planning and public spending in regard; aim at the centrality of user experience and needs; use an architectural approach based on open and 
standard logics; seek solutions to stimulate cost reduction and improve the quality of services.
11 Ref. https://pianotriennale-ict.italia.it/.

Italy and digital services

The  Plan  was  created  to  effectively  guide  the  digital  transformation  of  the  country, 
becoming  a  reference  for  central  and  local  administrations  in  the  development  of  their 
information systems. It sets the fundamental architectural principles, the rules of usability 
and interoperability and rationalises ICT expenditure.

EVOLUTION OF THE STRATEGIC MODEL THANKS TO ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

I

G
N
R
O
T
N
O
M

I

16

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

ECOSYSTEMS

DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP                       TRANSPORT             SCHOOLS            TOURISM

IMMATERIAL INFRASTRUCTURES

ENABLING PLATFORMS:     CIE     SPID     PagoPA     FatturaPA     ANPR     NoiPA
PA DATI:     DATA BANKS     OPEN DATA     CONTROLLED DICTIONARIES

PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURES

DATA CENTER                       CLOUD                      CONNECTIVITY

C
Y
B
E
R
S
E
C
U
R
T
Y

I

Tackling these challenges, which still appear “new”, imposes, however, the identification of 
a new technical, ethical and regulatory framework that enables the public sector to address 
and manage new scenarios, exploiting the projects of today and providing tools and skills 
for those of the future. At the same time, it is necessary to plan the ways to stimulate 
and accompany the cultural evolution of the country, involving the population, overcoming 
diversity, reticence and conflict, and identifying new perspectives. 
The use of Artificial Intelligence tools applied to services, the central subject of this White 
Paper, is only one of the sectors in which Italy is trying to achieve the objectives of the Three-
Year Plan for Information Technology in Public Administration. For this specific purpose, 
the “Artificial Intelligence Task Force at the service of citizens”12 was set up to discuss the 
new possibilities offered by this type of technology, in general in our daily life and, more 
specifically, in the construction of a new relationship between State and citizens.

12 Ref. https://ai.italia.it.

Data updated by the Digital Progress website (https://avanzamentodigitale.italia.it/it)

Project sheets of the three-year plan
SPID
The Digital Identity Public System is a service that allows citizens to access all the 
online services of the Public Administration with a single digital identity consisting 
of username and password. It can be used on a computer, tablet or smartphone.
It is a secure authentication system that guarantees the protection of personal data 
that cannot be used or transferred to third parties without the user’s permission.
What  can  I  do  with  SPID?  For  example,  healthcare  service  bookings,  school 
enrolments, access to the public Wi-Fi network, business practices with a single 
password.

>2

MILLION

8

>3

THOUSAND

SPID IDENTITY 

PROVIDED

ACTIVE DIGITAL IDENTITY 

MANAGERS

ACTIVE 

ADMINISTRATIONS

1717

Electronic Health Record (EHR/FSE)
The  EHR/FSE  is  the  tool  with  which  citizens  can  trace,  consult  and  share  their 
health  history.  The  EHR/FSE  manages  all  the  health  and  social-health  digital 
data and documents generated by the patient’s present and past clinical events.  
It has a temporal horizon that covers the entire life of the patient and is constituted, 
subject to consent, by the Regions and Autonomous Provinces for the purposes of 
prevention, diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation pursued by the National Health 
Service and the regional social and health services taking care of the patient.

10

25%

43%

OPERATING REGIONS

CITIZENS WHO 
ACTIVATED FSE

REPORTS ISSUED BY 

FSE

Data updated by the Digital Progress website (https://avanzamentodigitale.italia.it/it)

E-billing
E-billing is a document in digital format the authenticity and integrity of which are 
guaranteed by the presence of the electronic signature of the person issuing the 
invoice and sending it to a specific Interchange System (SDI). 
Public Administrations are obliged to issue, transmit, manage, and store invoices 
exclusively in electronic format.

87

MILLION

>57

THOUSAND

>22

THOUSAND

INVOICES MANAGED

E-BILLING OFFICES ON 

INDICEPA

ADMINISTRATIONS 

PRESENT ON INDICEPA

18

PagoPA
PagoPA  is  an  initiative  that  allows  citizens  and  businesses  to  pay  the  Public 
Administration  electronically  on  the  basis  of  rules,  standards  and  instruments 
defined by AgID and accepted by the PA, Banks, Post Offices and other adhering 
payment institutions (Payment service providers - PSP).

>16

THOUSAND

>13

THOUSAND

>7

MILLION

PARTICIPATING PA

ACTIVE PA

TOTAL TRANSACTIONS

Data updated by the Digital Progress website (https://avanzamentodigitale.italia.it/it)

Digital security (CERT-PA)
The  CERT-PA  (Computer  Emergency  Response  Team  Public  Administration)  is  a 
structure  that  operates  within  AgID  and  is  responsible  for  the  processing  of  IT 
security incidents of the domain constituted by public administrations. 
The  CERT-PA 
intervenes  following  reports  from:  public  administrations  of 
constituency,  Italian  IT  security  organizations;  other  Italian  or  international 
organizations (CERT network); monitoring and intelligence activities.

>1,4

THOUSAND

>100

THOUSAND

>5

MILLION

>3

THOUSAND

REPORTS RECEIVED 

VE IMPORTED IN 

IOC PROCESSED BY 

MALWARE ANALYZED BY 

BY CERT PA

INFOSEC

INFOSEC

INFOSEC

1919

Open Data
Open  data  is  public  data  that  must  be  published  in  a  way  that  is  easy  to  reuse. 
To this end, key aspects are: licensing, standardization, quality, accessibility even 
through automated applications. 
Each administration is required to issue open data to contribute to the enhancement 
of  public  information  assets,  in  line  with  international  and  national  open  data 
policies.

>19

THOUSAND

380

DATASET

ADMINISTRATIONS

Artificial intelligence today

By  far,  the  greatest  danger  of  Artificial  Intelligence  is  that  people 
conclude too early that they understand it.

Eliezer Yudkowsky

Artificial intelligence today

The AI products that will be most popular in the next 20 years, those that we will all 
use, have not yet been invented. This means that we are not late.
(Kevin Kelly)

What is Artificial Intelligence (AI)? 
There  are  many  definitions,  among  them,  the  one  of  the  University  of  Stanford,  which 
identifies it as “a science and a set of computational techniques that are inspired - albeit 
typically operating in a different way - by the way in which human beings use their nervous 
system and their body to feel, learn, reason and act” 13.

21

AI pervades our lives even if we are not aware. 
AI technologies are emerging as a central force in society. The sector has gone from 
simply developing systems that are intelligent to developing intelligent systems that 
are reliable and knowledgeable.

Source: Artificial Intelligence and life in 2030, One hundred year study on Artificial Intelligence, Stanford University, 2016

Novels and science fiction films exploit and give credit to fear of the unknown: Artificial 
Intelligence is often represented in a negative way, as a danger to humanity, potentially 
capable of taking over and dominating 14 us but in reality AI is already part of our daily life.

With the digital assistants of mobile phones, driver assistance systems, the chatbots 15 that 
respond when we call public or private entities, systems for machine translation of texts 
and speeches, robots in the factory, algorithms that recommend us products and services 
to our liking and those that assist us in learning, or increasingly realistic and engaging video 
games.

Source: AI takes center stage, Bot.Me: A revolutionary partnership, Pwc 2017

13 Ref. “Artificial Intelligence and life in 2030, One hundred year study on Artificial Intelligence”, Stanford University, 2016, p. 5.
14 Think of the computer Hal9000 in 2001 Space Odyssey (Kubrick, 1968) or of the exterminator robot in Terminator (Cameron, 1985).
15 Ref. detailed box in “The main areas of application”.

Artificial intelligence today

Artificial Intelligence, for example, can improve our lives by driving in our place, taking care 
of elderly people in need of assistance, carrying out dangerous and arduous jobs, helping us 
make informed decisions, rationally managing large amounts of data that would otherwise 
be difficult to interpret, allowing us to communicate while not knowing the language of 
our  interlocutors,  following  us  in  our  studies  or  increasing  cultural  and  entertainment 
experiences or speeding up bureaucratic procedures.

This is possible in certain specific application areas16 thanks to recent developments in AI 
techniques, essentially due to the wide availability of annotated data, to the improvement 
in learning techniques and to the availability of high computational capacity at increasingly 
accessible costs.

AI RESEARCH AREAS

Some of the areas currently of priority were not so in the past and it is likely that different 
areas will emerge in the future.

22

LARGE-SCALE MACHINE LEARNING
Many basic problems in machine learning (such as supervised and non-supervised learning) are 
well known. A central focus in current studies concerns the chance of increasing the ability of 
algorithms to work on extremely large datasets.

DEEP LEARNING
For example, the ability to learn convolutional neural networks has brought many benefits to the 
computer vision sector, with applications such as object recognition, video labelling and other 
variants.

REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
While  traditional  machine  learning  has  a  clear  focus  on  pattern  mining  (rule  extraction), 
reinforcement learning has shifted focus on decision making and its motivational levers. 
This technology can help advance the ability of AI to learn and perform actions in the real world.

ROBOTICS
Robotic  navigation  in  static  environments  is  widely  resolved.  Current  efforts  are  focused  on 
providing robots with the ability to interact with the surrounding reality in a predictable way.

16 Ref. “Artificial Intelligence and life in 2030, One hundred year study on Artificial Intelligence”, Stanford University, 2016, p. 9.

Artificial intelligence today

COMPUTER VISION
It is currently the most relevant form of machine perception. This is the AI sector on which the 
advent of deep learning has more impact. 
Until  a  few  years  ago,  support  vector  machines  represented  the  most  used  method  for 
visual classification activities. However, the evolution and low-cost availability of large-scale 
computing, the availability of large amounts of data and the fine-tuning of networks of neural 
network algorithms has allowed the AI to perform visual classification tasks better than human 
beings. 

NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING
Often associated with automatic speech recognition, it is a very dynamic sector in the area of 
machine perception. Research in this area is now focused on the ability to develop systems 
capable of interacting with people through dialogue and not with simple standard reactions. 

COLLABORATIVE SYSTEMS
Research  on  collaborative  systems  investigates  models  and  algorithms  to  support  the 
development of autonomous systems that can collaborate with each other and with human 
beings. 

23

CROWDSOURCING AND HUMAN COMPUTATION
Focused on the creation of innovative ways to exploit human intelligence.

INTERNET OF THINGS - IOT
Research focused on the idea that many devices can be connected and exchange information 
is becoming more and more substantial. In this area, AI can elaborate and process the huge 
amount of data resulting from these interactions. 

NEUROMORPHIC COMPUTING
Traditional computers use von Neumann’s architecture model (I/O, models, data and separate 
memory). With the success of the deep neural networks, alternative models are being developed, 
many of which are inspired by neural biological networks. 

Source: AI takes center stage, Bot.Me: A revolutionary partnership, Pwc 2017

The main application areas

Artificial intelligence today

24

There are already examples of how PA can benefit from adopting AI solutions; among these 
we already see effects and applications in the health, education and judiciary system, in 
public  employment,  security  and,  in  general,  in  the  management  of  relationships  with 
citizens.
In this latter field, Artificial Intelligence can be used to answer questions, to look for but 
also to process documents, fill in forms, to correctly route various types of requests or to 
perform translations17.

CHATBOT

For example, a chatbot equipped with AI can respond simultaneously to conversations that come at 
a given time, eliminating waiting times and, once having understood the needs of its interlocutor, can 
direct him to the right departments, help him find the documentation he needs, provide instructions to 
correctly submit his written requests, if necessary also speaking in a foreign language, or translating 
the bureaucratic terms that the user does not understand.

In this way, public officials can be freed from the task of answering the simplest questions 
and tasks, which are often the most recurring, saving time to devote to other activities, to 
provide complex advice and better services.

Some of the functionalities described can also be used in healthcare, for example to manage 
examinations and tests more rapidly.

In this sector, research into robots that take care of patients is also very interesting, possibly 
memorising the medicines to be administered to them, the times and doses, or monitoring 
their state of health by means of biometric measurements to be transmitted to the doctor, 
even accompanied by a possible hypothesis.

Precisely this type of situation, which could lend itself to significant ethical and scientific 
controversies or to potential conflicts of interests between patients and doctors, highlights 
a focal point in which AI is excellently positioned, with its ability to create unprecedented 
interactions between administrative-technological systems and human beings.

17 Ref. Hila Mehr, “Artificial Intelligence for Citizen Services and Government”, Harvard Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation, 2017.

Artificial intelligence today

Moreover, it is already possible to imagine programming intelligent systems that read tests 
results and interpret them, based on the statistics conducted on large amounts of similar 
data and on their meaning18. There are even predictive tools to assess potential risks of 
evolution of individual diseases. 
Precision medicine, research on personalized treatments, analysis on the possible effects 
of certain drugs on individual patients are all areas that promise great results, thanks to 
the ability of Artificial Intelligence to store and process a lot of information on patients; 
however, at the same time, they require careful monitoring by the medical community as 
well as strict observance of privacy and ethical and professional standards19.

USES OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

STRENGTHEN IT SECURITY AND 
PRIVACY

PREVENT TUMOURS AND DISEASES 

MAKE MORE EFFICIENT USE OF CLEAN 
ENERGY

ENSURE GREATER FINANCIAL 
SECURITY

TRANSFORM GLOBAL EDUCATION

2525

IMPROVE HEALTH AND WELL-BEING 

INFLUENCE ECONOMIC GROWTH

CONTRAST CLIMATE CHANGE

REDUCE INCOME DISPARITY

REDUCE GENDER DISPARITY

Source: Artificial Intelligence and life in 2030, One hundred year study on Artificial Intelligence”, Stanford University, 2016

Something  very  similar  is  happening  in  schools,  where  artificial  teaching  assistants  are 
already  available,  able  to  follow  students  individually,  suggesting  content  and  concepts 
selected to help them develop their skills, deepen their knowledge, or bridge the gap with 
their fellow students20.
These tools can be used by Public Administration for staff training, career management and 
internal organisation.
The  security  sector  can  also  benefit  from  the  development  of  Artificial  Intelligence 
technologies.  For  example,  in  the  surveillance  field,  with  computer  vision  and  natural 
language processing systems that can process large amounts of images, texts and speeches, 
to detect possible threats in real time. 

18 Ref. IBM’s “Watson for Oncology”, imagined as a true oncologist’s assistant in the fight against cancer.
19 For example, the paradox of automation: doctors could rely too much on the machine (that in psychological experience “never fails”) and not take responsibility for a diagnosis 
different from that of the machine (that could be wrong, possibly because of a bug, a system error).
20 Ref. http://www.lastampa.it/2017/06/15/multimedia/tecnologia/woogie-lassistente-robot-che-aiuta-i-bambini-a-studiare-e-non-solo-ZlrNV7rKtt3MqoKZ54U3uM/pagina.
html.

Artificial intelligence today

Or in the environmental disaster prevention field, where it is possible to perform simulations 
of  the  consequences  of  natural  phenomena,  both  before  and  after  they  occur,  as  well 
as during their development, helping the authorities to decide how to intervene. Similar 
technologies  can  also  be  used  by  law  enforcement  agencies,  to  patrol  cities,  based  on 
continuously updated data, linked to the crimes committed in the various areas and to other 
significant variables.

Finally, also public decision makers can use intelligent algorithms, capable of processing 
large amounts of data, for example on the resources available in disadvantaged areas, or 
on the progress of the various sectors - health, judicial, scholastic, agri-food, etc. - in order 
to obtain a clearer view of the choices they must or want to accomplish. It is possible, as 
they are experimenting in Japan21, that personnel in public offices respond in a personalised 
manner to all citizen requests, using adequately instructed Artificial Intelligence tools, which 
automatically produce the contents to be sent.

It will be up to the administrations to decide how to use the resources freed up by the 
introduction of these new technologies, in a range of options that include the qualitative 
improvement of services and the reduction of costs for their operation.

26

SECURITY

One of the main problems in all these areas is that of guaranteeing the security of the AI systems: 
entry of an attacker in systems that, for example, will be able to drive a bus, could jeopardize the 
lives of those on board, as too could tampering with the surveillance tools of a public place make it 
vulnerable to attacks, or knowledge, by a hacker, of the model used by the Artificial Intelligence for the 
management of sensitive data, could make such data insecure. 
To  effectively  address  these  issues,  it  is  necessary  to  put  in  place  various  solutions,  some 
of  a  technical  nature,  others  of  a  more  general  nature,  raising  awareness  among  citizens 
and  administrations.  From  a  technical  point  of  view,  it  is  important  to  work  to  ensure 
that,  by  law,  certain  standards  are  guaranteed,  both  for  the  security  of  the  data  used 
by  the  algorithms,  as  well  as  for  the  security  of  the  algorithms  themselves, 
imposing 
is  always  followed22. 
that,  for  their 

implementation,  the  security  by  design  paradigm 

21 Hila Mehr, Artificial Intelligence for Citizen Services and Government, Harvard Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation, 2017, p. 8.
22 In essence, this paradigm requires that security be pursued already when designing databases and Artificial Intelligence algorithms.

The potential of AI in Public Administration

Artificial intelligence today

The potential of Artificial Intelligence for Public Administration is manifold. Nevertheless, 
the  scientific  community  and  public  opinion  highlight  some  critical  issues  that  must  be 
taken into account in order to prevent distorted effects in the application of these tools and 
technologies.

With reference to machine learning systems, it already happens today that both the data 
that an AI feeds on and the algorithms it consists of produce bias23 - distorted interpretations 
of the information in its possession - affecting its “reasoning”24 and leading it into error.
Making predictions with inadequately designed tools can only lead to wrong and, in many 
cases, even ethically incorrect decisions25.

Furthermore, it is worth pointing out that, currently, Artificial Intelligence is able to carry 
out, with a certain precision, a small number of cognitive activities26 referring to specific 
sectorial domains, generally lacking background knowledge.

2727

If  correctly  designed  and  implemented,  AI  technologies  can  in  fact  guarantee  concrete 
prospects for improving the quality of life. In the relationship between citizens and public 
administration, they will be able to allow greater accessibility to public services, facilitating 
a substantial reduction in their costs, with benefits in terms of reduction of social spending, 
which can thus be reallocated. In perspective, it will be possible to enhance many procedures 
with adequate automation, offering citizens the opportunity to interact with the State in a 
more agile, effective and personalised way. 
We will all benefit from this, including the elderly, the disabled and citizens belonging to the 
disadvantaged categories.

This will allow Public Administration to recover and strengthen the relationship of trust 
with the community. In order to encourage this recovery, introducing technologies such as 
AI in PA requires technical and administrative, but also systemic, narrative and aesthetic 
interventions, capable of generating meaning and involvement.

23 Ref. “Bias and inclusion”, AI NOW 2017 Report, p. 14.
24 Ref. box di approfondimento in “Prevenire le diseguaglianze”. 
25 Ref. “Sfida Etica”.
26 For further information https://hbr.org/2016/11/what-artificial-intelligence-can-and-cant-do-right-now.

Artificial intelligence today

PA  may  also  use  AI  methodologies  and  technologies  to  support  the  rationalisation  and 
integration  of  its  databases,  in  a  perspective  of  semantic  interoperability  that  makes  it 
easier to circulate information between administrations to the benefit of end users27.

The enormous wealth of knowledge generated and collected over time in such databases 
is often “invisible”, because unstructured, dispersed in multiple archives and largely in the 
memory of people rather than of the organization. Making “invisible knowledge” visible is 
one of the potential and most promising areas of application of AI in the PA with solutions 
able to read and understand and classify the contents of documents and reports produced 
over decades to obtain the most relevant information.

AI will also affect the redefinition of the relationship between public and private with a view 
to greater transparency through the implementation of e-procurement practices. Among 
the areas that in the next decade will benefit from the AI revolution, in fact, will be precisely 
that of public procurement.

WHAT ARE THE POTENTIAL DAMAGES ASSOCIATED WITH IA SYSTEMS

28

DIGITAL

PHYSICAL

POLITICAL

Automated phishing of fake 
emails, websites and links to 
steal information.

Automated terrorism using 
drones or autonomous vehicles 
as weapons.

Propaganda, through images 
and fake videos that are easily 
generated.

Massive hacking, through the 
automated discovery of system 
vulnerabilities. 

Deceive AI systems by 
exploiting to own advantage the 
defects in the interpretation of 
reality by AI.

Swarms of Robots trying to 
achieve the same goal.

Remote attacks, made possible 
by the fact that autonomous 
robots can be controlled from 
any distance.

Automatic removal of dissent, 
thanks to the possibility to 
find, analyze and automatically 
remove texts and images.

Personalized persuasion, with 
the use of public information to 
influence someone’s opinion.

Source: AI experts list the real dangers of artificial intelligence, Dave Gershgorn Feb. 2018

FORESEEN DEVELOPMENTS OF IA

Supports human beings in some 
specific areas such as speech 
recognition.

Capable of carrying out many 
of the tasks that human bein-
gs can perform.

Clearly superior to the human 
brain in all its aspects. A 
technology capable of showing 
judgement skills, social skills 
and creativity.

Source: Destination unknown: Exploring the impact of Artificial Intelligence on Government September 2017- Centre for public impact

27  Ref. The interoperability model of the Three-Year Plan: https://pianotriennale-ict.italia.it/interoperabilita.

Artificial intelligence today

POSSIBLE PROGRESS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

Progress  in  Artificial  Intelligence  could  lead  to  the  replacement  of  workers  with  more  efficient  robots 
in  the  future.  We  provide  a  time  frame  based  on  a  survey  conducted  by  a  group  of  AI  researchers 
with  Katja  Grace  together  with  the  Future  of  Humanity 
Institute  at  the  University  of  Oxford.  
The  survey  identified  the  year  in  which  AI-controlled  technologies  will  be  able  to  perform  the  following 
activities:

2020

PLAY POKER SO WELL TO WIN THE WORLD SERIES OF 
POKER

FOLD LAUNDRY BETTER THAN THE AVERAGE 
EMPLOYEES IN CLOTHING STORES

2022

2024

TRANSLATE SPOKEN LANGUAGE

WRITE A HIGH SCHOOL PAPER

2026

2929

2027

RECORD A POP SONG THAT WILL BE AMONG THE TOP 40 
DRIVE CARS/TRUCKS

BEAT THE FASTEST RUNNER IN THE WORLD IN A 5 KM 
RACE IN THE CITY (AS A BIPED ROBOT)

2028

2031

WORK IN RETAIL TRADE

WRITE ONE OF THE BEST SELLERS SELECTED BY NEW 
YORK TIMES 

2049

2053

PERFORM SURGICAL INTERVENTIONS

PERFORM MATHEMATICAL RESEARCH

2059

2061

REPLACE MAN IN EVERY ACTIVITY

REPLACE MAN IN EVERY JOB

2137

Source: When Will AI Exceed Human Performance? Evidence from AI Experts, May 2017, Katja Grace, John Salvatier, Allan Dafoe, Baobao Zhang, Owain Evans, Future of Humanity 
Institute, University of Oxford

Hypothetical scenario 

Artificial intelligence today

Giulia, her father Tommaso and little Gaia are now fictional characters. We do not know 
yet if anyone will live their lives or some glimpses of them. What is certain is that Artificial 
Intelligence is changing our everyday life from all points of view.

How will our working days be in 5, 10 or 25 years?
What will our relationship be with the cities we live in with the consistent introduction of AI 
solutions?

30

Giulia has just turned off her computer. It is five o’clock in the afternoon and 
she has just gone through the exit turnstiles of the Ministry. It is Monday and 
she is running towards the bus stop. She cannot believe she is going home so 
early so that she can then go to that contemporary art exhibition that interests 
her so much. This is a very busy time for her both at work and at home. She has 
summarized thousands of questionnaires on behalf of the Ministry; the activity 
that once would have taken her entire afternoons over documents today has 
become a task that can be completed in a few days without too much effort.
Thanks to the online data processing platform to which she has access from her 
office, Giulia has managed to have an automatic summary of the documents on 
which she is working in less than a week. When she was hired about 15 years 
ago, a job like this would taken twice as much, maybe three times as much for 
her and her colleagues.
Who  would  have  thought  that  one  day  she,  born  in  the  age  of  analogical 
communication, and who has grown up with the Walkman and with books under 
her arm, could no longer do without algorithms?
Today, Giulia gets to the city avoiding traffic. Through an app installed on her 
mobile phone, the Municipality recommends what public transport to use to get 
home sooner and she can choose the least polluting solution. While she is sitting 
on the bus, Giulia is on the Facebook page of the Palazzo hosting the exhibition. 
She wants to know the exact opening time and if there is an area reserved for 
children at the venue.
She asks Marina, not a secretary but the museum chatbot that replies in real 
time from the display. “Science fiction” compared to when a few years ago, she 
had to go through many pages of Internet sites and telephone exchanges to 
obtain the simplest information. 

3131

Artificial intelligence today

Switchboards do not exist anymore.
Technology is an integral part of her life, it has simplified her work and brought 
the world closer. She knows very well that the algorithm universe needs to be 
ruled, since  simplification and data usage have two different sides.   
For the last weeks, they have been discussing at home and with the closest 
friends  the  situation  of  Giulia’s  father,    Tommaso,  who  was  diagnosed  with 
cancer a few months ago. 
A few hours after receiving the medical report, the hospital communicated the 
family that Tommaso would not be operated. Diagnostics has taken giant leaps, 
as well as study of genomes.  
By  querying  data  that  was  unknown  to  her  family,  doctors  found  out  that 
Giulia’s great-great grandfather and fourth grandfather had developed a similar 
disease due to a genetic disorder that is very hard to treat. “Even after surgical 
intervention, chances of recover are less than 30%” the computer sentenced. 
The hospital will not embark on a path that algorithms define  “too costly for the 
low probability of success”. 
Lights  and  shadows,  but  Giulia  has  almost  arrived  home.  Her  daughter  Gaia 
and  Stitch,  a  robot  that  has  become  her  personal  teacher  and  babysitter, 
are waiting for her. Stitch itself is a son of “Artificial Intelligence” and it deals 
with Gaia’s education ever since she has joined the secondary school. It uses 
advanced learning techniques, which adapt themselves to Gaia’s level, helping 
her reviewing the most difficult subjects and replacing Giulia during the after-
school. 
Giulia lives alone for most of the year and she has to combine her mother’s 
role with her job, which is very demanding since she needed to specialise in 
tasks and duties that are different from those required for being recruited at the 
Ministry several years ago.
Giulia  greets  her  daughter,  she  checks  with  Stich  that  the  maths  exercise  is 
completed and that the homework has been done before she starts playing with 
Gaia.
Her smartphone rings, it notifies that she has to check questionnaires for her 
job.
It rings again, the exhibition is opening and the last bus to the kids’ corner is 
arriving. AI has also changed her relationship with time and watches.  
It rings again, this time it’s a call, her mother. It is unexpected: in the algorithm 
time it is almost impossible to be late, but, you know, the mom is always the 
mom.

The challenges of AI at the 
service of the citizens

Artificial intelligence is the future, not only for Russia, but for all humankind. It comes 
with colossal opportunities, but also threats that are difficult to predict. Whoever 
becomes the leader in this sphere will become the ruler of the world.

Putin, in his official speech for the inauguration of the Russian school year in September 2017

China,  Russia,  soon  all  countries  w  strong  computer  science.  Competition  for  AI 
superiority at national level most likely cause of the third World War.

Elon Musk, founder of SpaceX, co-founder and CEO of Tesla, responds on Twitter to Putin’s 
message, September 2017

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

ETHICS

TECHNOLOGY

SKILLS

ROLE OF DATA

LEGAL CONTEXT

ACCOMPANYING THE TRANSFORMATION

PREVENTING INEQUALITIES

MEASURING THE IMPACT

THE HUMAN BEING

3333

1

ETHICS

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

Ethics change with technology..
(Larry Niven)

The issue of Artificial Intelligence, as with the appearance and affirmation of every new 
technology, re-proposes the contrast between the “doom-mongers and enthusiasts”28.

The doom-mongers fear that Artificial Intelligence will prevail over people, will decide for 
them,  steal  their  jobs,  discriminate  against  them,  violate  their  privacy,  and  will  secretly 
control them by conditioning their lives.

The  enthusiasts,  on  the  other  hand,  dream  of  a  world  where  machines  are  capable  of 
autonomously performing bureaucratic processes, of being used as powerful computational 
tools to process and interpret large amounts of data in the best way, replacing men in the 
most burdensome and repetitive tasks, and creating solutions able to diminish crime and 
eradicate diseases.

34

DOOM-MONGERS

ENTHUSIASTS

• AI will have the upper hand over people
• AI will decide for them
• AI will steal their work from them
• AI will discriminate against them
• AI will violate their privacy

• AI independently conducts bureaucratic processes
• AI is a powerful calculation tool
• AI can replace men in the most demanding tasks
• AI can create solutions to reduce crimes
• AI can create solutions to eradicate diseases

Basically there are two perceptions of technology, of diametrically opposite sign.

That  of  the  “doom-mongers”,  negatively  assesses  the  introduction  of  AI  in  Public 
Administration (PA), citing a series of critical issues that could have negative effects not 
only on the efficiency and effectiveness of the measures but also on citizens’ rights. 

That of the “enthusiasts”, on the other hand, considers the use of AI to be extremely positive, 
believes that the implementation of these technologies can significantly improve not only 
the activity of the PA but also the quality of life of citizens and that a total and unconditional 
process of research and development is therefore necessary in this area29. 

28 Ref. Umberto Eco, Apocalittici e integrati, Bompiani, 1964.
29 The utopias of the “Californian ideology” (Richard Barbrook, Imaginary Futures: From Thinking Machines to the Global Village, 2007) are currently contrasted by the radical critici-
sm of technological “solutionism” (Eugenij Morozov, To Save Everything, Click Here. The Folly of Technological Solutionism, 2013).

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

Two  extreme  points  of  view,  each  with  different  peculiarities,  which  must  be  critically 
analysed  in  order  to  resolve  the  weaknesses  indicated  by  the  “doom-mongers”  and 
modulate the strengths sustained by the “enthusiasts”.

The examples mentioned above are not chosen by chance, but are the result of the debate 
that  in  recent  years  has  been  going  on  in  the  scientific  community  and  in  civil  society 
regarding the impact of AI systems on our lives.

The ethical challenge of the introduction of Artificial Intelligence solutions is represented 
by  the  need  to  respond  in  a  balanced  manner  to  the  polarisation  of  these  two  visions, 
integrating innovation and taking into account the effects that this has already had and will 
continue to have in the development of society, respecting and safeguarding the universally 
recognised core values.

The use of AI based on algorithms of data analysis in decision-making processes related 
to social, health and judicial issues (such as risk assessment) therefore requires a thorough 
reflection in terms of ethics and, more broadly, of governance. 

3535

The algorithms for data analysis involve high costs that encompass the entire evolutionary 
cycle  of  their  functioning:  from  implementation  to  evolutionary  maintenance,  to  the 
verification of results and to the training of users who must use them responsibly. Speaking 
of greater efficiency or tax cuts thanks to the use of AI technologies in public services can 
be a misleading narrative register as a correct development of such tools implies high costs 
and great attention to the ethical aspects related to their use.

The  focus  on  the  functional  development  of  this  technology  requires  the  economic  and 
professional resources suitable for ethical development and above all in line with the data it 
processes and the decisions it guides. Otherwise, what will come out of the analysis will only 
help finance the private sector, with the illusion of helping people. Or, worse, to introducing 
a distortion or a flight of responsibility, from time to time referring the cause of decisional 
errors to the algorithms instead of the decision makers.

Capitalizing on the benefits of technology requires important investment on the part of the 
PA and a significant commitment to improve the quality and efficiency of services and to 
have systems that are secure and able to truly reduce inequalities.

Public Administration is therefore called upon to deal with numerous and complex 
ethical issues.

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

To understand its extent, it is possible to analyse those that represent the central 
elements in the public debate and in scientific analysis:

DATA QUALITY AND NEUTRALITY30
Machine  learning  systems  need  data  which  is  “annotated”31  by  human  beings  (supervised 
learning) or at least selected and prepared (unsupervised learning). 
This also includes errors or bias introduced, even inadvertently, by the designers, replicating 
them  in  all  future  applications.  For  example,  datasets  with  bias  they  propagate  the  same 
evaluation  errors  in  the  meaning  of  an  image  or  a  concept,  as  happened,  for  example,  with 
certain algorithms used to prevent crimes, in which the data was compromised by a historical 
series that emphasised ethnic differences32. 
Or unbalanced datasets, that overestimate or underestimate the weight of certain variables 
in the reconstruction of the cause-effect relationship necessary to explain certain events and, 
above all, to predict them.

36

ACCOUNTABILITY E LIABILITY33
The examples just mentioned highlight the strong impact that Artificial Intelligence has on the 
decision-making activity of public entities. Both when it acts as an assistant to human beings as 
well as an autonomous entity, AI generates effects on the lives of people in relation to which it 
is necessary to be able to establish legal liability. 
Nevertheless, the ownership of the latter is not clearly identifiable, since it could be attributed 
to the producer34 or to the owner35 of the Artificial Intelligence, or even to its end user36. Those 
who design AI systems can be responsible for design or implementation defects, but not for 
behaviour caused by inadequate instruction datasets. 
Can  a  public  decision-maker  be  considered  politically  responsible  for  the  decisions  made  on 
the basis of algorithms that process data affected by the bias mentioned above? What type 
of responsibility can there be for Public Administration? If a robot hurts someone, who should 
be held responsible and who, if anyone, has the obligation to compensate the victim (and with 
which assets)? Can the public decision-maker transfer his political responsibility to an AI system 
that does not respond to a clear principle of representation? Is it ethically sustainable that, in 
order to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of measures, certain important choices can be 
made with the influence of an AI or even completely delegating them to the AI? 
And in trusting an AI system, how can its consistency be controlled over time? These are just 
some of the issues that emerge in this area and highlight the need to establish some principles 
for the use of AI technologies in a public context.

30 Ref. “Data challenges”.
31 Data that is enriched with comments and metadata. For example, a caption can act as a description of an image.
32 Bruno Lepri, Nuria Oliver, Emmanuel Letouz, Alex Pentland, Patrick Vinck, “Fair, transparent and accountable algorithmic decision making processes. The premise, the proposed 
solutions, and the open challenges”, Science business media, Springer, 2017.
33 Ref. “Legal challenge”.
34 There are neural networks whose calculation algorithms are not completely reconstructable, not even by their programmers, generating what is called the “black-box effect”.
35 What currently happens in the field of robotics.
36 With a parallel, we could cite the case of construction works. The builder bears full responsibility for the first years after the inauguration of the work, but then the responsibility 
passes to the person responsible for its maintenance.

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

TRASPARENCY AND OPENNESS37
The issue of the responsibility of public administration also has to do with the duties of the latter 
with respect to citizens, when it decides to provide them with services or to make decisions that 
concern them, using Artificial Intelligence solutions. 
The functioning of the latter must meet criteria of transparency and openness. 
Transparency becomes a fundamental prerequisite to avoid discrimination and solve the problem 
of information asymmetry, guaranteeing citizens the right to understand public decisions. It is 
also necessary to think about the policies chosen to determine the benchmarks (benchmark 
policy)  to  avoid  effects  of  a  larger  scale:  as  an  administrator  can  act  in  a  non-transparent 
manner by pursuing not the common good but private interests, a non-transparent algorithm 
could realize the same offenses even more broadly, producing not only injustices but also social 
discrimination.

3737

PROTECTION OF THE PRIVATE SPHERE38
A  further  need,  closely  linked  to  the  previous  one,  is  to  protect  the  data  of  individuals.  PA 
must design services based on AI able to guarantee efficiency and prompt response, but also 
protection of citizens’ sensitive data. 
This  requirement,  strictly  connected  to  the  legal  context,  has  some  ethical  peculiarities 
concerning the use that PA can make of the data that has come to its knowledge in contexts 
different from those in which it was collected. 
Is it ethically sustainable that PA, through the use of data collected for other purposes, takes 
action based on the new derived information? Is it ethical to use this data to feed predictive 
systems?

To address these challenges, it may be helpful to follow some general principles. 
Among these we can mention the need for an anthropocentric39 approach, according to 
which Artificial Intelligence must always be put at the service of people and not vice versa40. 

Moreover,  there  are  principles  of  procedural  (non-arbitrary  procedures),  formal  (equal 
treatment for equal individuals or groups) and substantial (effective removal of economic 
and social obstacles) equity, as well as the satisfaction of certain basic universal needs, 
including respect for the freedom and rights of individuals and the community41. 
These and many other aspects related to the need to place AI at the service of people in 
every context are analysed in subsequent challenges.

37 Ref. “Legal challenge”.
38 Ref. “Legal challenge”.
39 Ref. http://www.g7italy.it/sites/default/files/documents/ANNEX2-Artificial_Intelligence_0.pdf.
40 Necessary, paraphrasing Kantian thought, that AI “treats man always as an end and never as one of the means”. Immanuel Kant, Fondazione della metafisica dei costumi, 1785. 
41 Ref. https://medium.com/code-for-canada/responsible-ai-in-the-government-of-canada-a-sneak-peek-973727477bdf.

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

2

TECHNOLOGY

If a typical person can do a mental task with less than one second of thought, we 
can probably automate it using AI either now or in the near future.
(Josh Lovejoy)

Although Artificial Intelligence (AI) is currently not able to reproduce the complex functioning 
of  the  human  mind42,  but  only  approximate  some  limited  abilities43,  it  is  a  discipline 
which, acquired over sixty years of scientific, methodological and technological research, 
has become pervasive in industry and society. Its models and methods can certainly be 
conveniently used as tools for the implementation of innovative solutions in complex socio-
technical systems, such as that of public administrations, provided that, together with the 
opportunities, the limits of their scope of application are understood.

The  new  frontiers  of  particular  interest  for  Public  Administration  are  those  related  to 
studies and research on how AI systems are able to cooperate in the most effective way 
with human beings. 
This approach exploits AI machine learning and adaptation capabilities to provide a human-
machine interaction that best meets the needs of users, their interests and the real context 
in which they operate. 
Therefore,  it  becomes  important  to  conduct  research  consisting  of  methodological 
investigation, modelling, implementation and testing of Artificial Intelligence systems for 
various domains of interest to PA.

38

Linguistic technologies (Natural Language Processing - NLP) are certainly of great interest 
and are the basis of a large number of applications that fall within Artificial Intelligence. The 
deployment of these technologies, based today to a large extent on Open Source software, 
requires  the  availability  of  specific  text  datasets  (ex.  annotated  corpora),  lexicographical 
and semantic (ex. wordnet), as well as the dissemination of specialized skills necessary 
to manage training and adaptation processes to various areas of application (ex. health, 
justice, finance). 

The lack or unavailability of adequate resources for the Italian language, together with a 
lack of skills in the use of NLP technologies, could cause both a loss of competitiveness 
compared to other nations, and a dependence on platforms and solutions provided by a 
restricted number of subjects operating under monopoly conditions.

The distinctive characteristics of the “technological challenge” can therefore be identified 
by two keywords: “personalisation” and “adaptability”.

42  Research on so-called Full Intelligence and Strong AI, in terms of both Neuro Evolution (NE) and Brain Intelligence (BI), is still in its infancy.
43 Typically, those that do not require more than one second to provide a response to an external stimulus.

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

MAIN TECHNOLOGIES CLASSIFIED AS AI

CHATBOT OR VOICEBOT
Virtual online agent 
for customer service 
or human language 
interaction

SPEECH 
RECOGNITION
Ability of computers 
to understand and 
interpret speech

NATURAL LANGUAGE 
GENERATION
Interaction through 
sentences and texts

DECISION-
MAKING PROCESS
Provide the 
context for 
decision-making 
based on data 
analysis

3939

BIOMETRICS
Measurement of the 
characteristics of human 
expressions and physical 
states to understand 
intentions, emotions, age

DEEP LEARNING
Algorithms 
inspired by the 
structure and 
Brain functioning 
that create an 
artificial neural 
network

ANALYSIS OF 
VIDEO AND 
IMAGES
Analysis of 
images and 
videos to 
interpret the 
contents

SWARM INTELLIGENCE
Use of a large group of 
autonomous agents, 
each of which helps to 
solve a problem

MACHINE 
LEARNING
The ability of 
computers to 
learn without 
having been 
specially 
programmed for 
this

Source Capgemini Digital Transformation Institute Analysis 2017

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

In fact, the overcoming of this challenge means to be able to create PA systems and services 
modelled on the multiple needs of citizens, able to evolve with them, able to encourage 
personalised experiences.

This  issue  can  be  approached  analytically  by  linking  the  most  developed  sectors  and 
technologies  in  the  field  of  Artificial  Intelligence  with  the  activities  and  tasks  typical  of 
Public Administration.

The areas of use of “intelligent” technologies44 in Public Administration are innumerable, 
not only from a long-term perspective, but, in certain cases, even in the current situation. 

For example45 here we can mention:

HEALTHCARE SYSTEM 
diagnostic tools able to assist in the analysis of reports; integration of different sources and 
data merging; epidemiological analysis to identify public health risks early; instant translation 
services to facilitate hospital and territorial medical visits to foreigners; predictive tools to 
evaluate potential risks of disease evolution or to evaluate the effectiveness of therapies; 
patient  assistance  tools,  able  to  follow  them  during  treatment;  precision  medicine,  for 
the identification of personalised treatments; better logistics organisation of healthcare 
structure activities.

40

CITIZEN RELATIONS 
in the simplification of procedures and in order to obtain a two-way communication between 
PA  and  citizens  and  a  personalised  interaction  in  which  citizens  have  all  the  necessary 
support to satisfy their most varied needs.

JUDICIAL SYSTEM 
simplification  of  legislation;  fraud  identification;  fight  against  corruption  and  crime, 
especially organised crime; reduction of civil litigation through easier access to legislation 
and jurisprudence; digitisation of documents and understanding of the text and information 
present.

SCHOOL SYSTEM 
automatic evaluation tools; personalisation of teaching material; automated tutoring, by 
means of recommendation tools to maintain attention; suggestions concerning personalised 
variations to be introduced in the school programme; extraction of predictive indicators for 
school drop-out risk.

44 Ref. the technologies listed in chapter 2.
45 Ref. “Challenge reduce inequalities”.

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

SECURITY 
AI amplifies the integrated impact of publicly available structured and unstructured data, 
thanks  to  which  it  can  support  advanced  forms  of  management  and  prevention  in  the 
policing field.

PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT AND PLACEMENT 
organisation  of  employees  and  careers;  career  counselling  and  management  of  internal 
processes and documentation.

MOBILITY AND TRASPORT 
traffic management, traffic and pollution predictive models, management of public transport 
logistics, but also autonomous transport solutions; real-time monitoring of sensor data.

TAX SYSTEM 
application of AI techniques to identify cases of potential tax avoidance and evasion through 
the analysis and crossover of data from different sectors of the state;

41

ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING 
the use of machine learning algorithms on 5G wireless sensor data (ex. video cameras, 
radioactivity  detectors,  chemicals,  temperature,  brightness,  humidity,  etc.)  could  allow 
monitoring and intercepting critical events in the territory (ex. automatic search of events 
on video surveillance data combined with chemical detection analysis to identify eco-crimes 
such as spills of harmful substances, similarly possible to define indicators for fires, floods, 
collapses, etc.).

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS

MACHINE LEARNING

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
TECHNOLOGICAL PANORAMA

DEEP LEARNING

ARTIFICIAL NEURAL 
NETWORKS

PATTERN 
RECOGNITION

PROCESSING OF 
NATURAL LANGUAGE

NEUROMORPHIC 
 
ELABORATION

INFORMATION 
 
SECURITY

PERSONAL 
ASSISTANT 
ROBOTS

AUTONOMOUS 
SURGICAL 
ROBOTS

42

 

NEW 
GENERATION
OF CLOUD 
ROBOTICS

GAMES CONTROLLED 
BY THOUGHT

UNIVERSAL TRANSLATION 
IN REAL TIME

 

VIRTUAL PARTNER 

AVAILABLE TECHNOLOGY

Now

1-2 years

2-4 years

> 4 years

CHATBOT

ANALYSIS OF EMOTIONS
IN REAL TIME

Source: Callaghan Innovation 2017, Frost & Sullivan “Artificial Intelligence- R&D and Applications Road Map” (Dec 2016), Harvard Business Review- The competitive landscape for 
Machine Intelligence (Nov 2016), Shivon Zilis and James Chan “The State of Machine Intelligence, 2016” (2016), Stanford University. “Artificial Intelligence and Life in 2030” (2016)

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

BORBOT PROJECT

Project: virtual assistant to support customer service staff 
AI technology used: question answering
Public entities involved: National Museum of the Royal Palace of Caserta
The Borbot project, which stands for Borboni and Robotics, was launched in 2017 
by the National Museum of the Royal Palace of Caserta. It is a virtual assistant, 
present on the Museum’s Facebook page, which through question answering is 
able to respond to users’ questions, providing detailed tourist information and 
news on the monument.
In  a  month,  the  system  was  able  to  perform  an  average  of  20  thousand 
interactions,  supporting  the  Museum’s  front  office  service  and  allowing  the 
customer service staff to focus on services with greater added value.
Website: http://borbot.it/

DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR CHRONIC 

OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE

Project: remote monitoring system for patients suffering from COPD
AI technology used: machine learning
Public  entities  involved:  Unit  of  Processing  Systems  and  Bio-IT  of  the  Bio-
Medico Campus of Rome, Polyclinic University Bio-Medico Campus of Rome
The Polyclinic University Bio-Medico Campus of Rome has experimented on a 
group of 22 patients with COPD the use of a home remote monitoring system 
capable of detecting potentially dangerous events for patients.
Developed  by  the  Unit  of  Processing  Systems  and  Bio-IT  of  the  Bio-Medico 
Campus  of  Rome,  it  works  through  AI  techniques  of  machine  learning  and 
acquires three times a day heart rate data and haemoglobin saturation through 
a pulse oximeter connected to an app specifically designed for smartphones. 
This way, the system evaluates any dangerous situations for the patient and 
signals them to the healthcare unit.
The experiments on the data collected show that the recognition performance 
of potentially dangerous events of the system are better than those obtained 
by  medical  experts.  Furthermore,  the  support  offered  by  the  system  in  the 
decision-making process allows increasing agreement among specialists.
Website:  www.unicampus.it/ricerca/unita-di-ricerca/sistemi-di-elaborazione-
e-bioinformatica

43

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

3

SKILLS

We cannot teach our kids to compete with machines. Machines are faster, do not get 
tired, do not become angry. We have to teach our kids something unique. In this way, in 
thirty years’ time, they will have a chance.
(Jack Ma)

While all of us in everyday life are beginning to come across Artificial Intelligence tools (e.g. 
chatbots, virtual assistants and automated traffic calculation and management systems), 
there is a different familiarity in its use in professional contexts or in Public Administration46.

The world of work is impacted by a profound transformation and in we will soon see an 
evolution of professions: there will be new ones, while the existing ones will be extensively 
modified with the introduction of new processes and methodologies47.

It will be necessary to ensure that people are able to design and develop AI systems and 
applications,  also  in  direct  and  deep  collaboration  with  research  and  major  technology 
operators.

44

In the same way, it will be of fundamental importance to cultivate and develop the skills 
necessary for the interaction between human beings and AI, which will become increasingly 
complex by virtue of the possibility of touching the language, gestures, body, emotions and 
many other expressive dimensions of mankind48.

The consolidation of skills is therefore crucial to be aligned with the great technological 
and socio-economic changes that the world is about to face, in order to be able to prepare 
young generations, but also adults, to seize future challenges.

How are these skills enabled? There are several areas to act on: that, more specifically, of 
training public and private workers, on both the demand as well as the supply side, the 
more general, but not less important, aspect of the literacy of everyone in order to fully 
exploit digital services, and the most advanced aspect of specialized and trans-disciplinary 
training.

46 Hila Mehr, “Artificial Intelligence for Citizen Services and Government”, HARVARD Kennedy School ‐ ASH Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation, 2017.
47 Carl Benedikt Frey, Michael Osborne, “The Future of Employment: how susceptible are jobs to computerisation?”, The Oxford Martin Programme on Technology and Employment, 
2013.
48 Ref. Challenge 9 “The human being”.

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

In the second area, that of literacy, it is important to help people understand what Artificial 
Intelligence is and what benefits it can actually make and what risks it entails, in order 
to enable them to make the best use of the services offered, inculcating a positive and 
optimistic approach in the collective imagination avoiding the rejection of the unknown49. 

Furthermore, since the relationship with AI largely takes place through natural interfaces 
- such as speech, written text and gestures - it is necessary to “educate” citizens with the 
aim of reducing the access gap to such technologies.

This  latter  point,  of  course,  primarily  involves  the  school  system,  which  must  take  into 
account the changes described in order to make the training of citizens and workers of the 
future effective. 
Currently, and probably still for many years, Artificial Intelligence will be able to perform 
rather simple tasks. 

Already today, however, it is important that the school system and the university system 
enable students for the future in which they will live as adults, therefore developing problem 
solving and information analysis and synthesis skills, as well as those of formulation of 
independent opinions, creativity, empathic interaction and refined use of one’s sensory and 
psychomotor capacities, areas in which it will be difficult for machines to compete with 
human beings.

45

It clearly emerges that knowledge models based mainly on the memorisation of notions 
and  information  that  have  not  been  analysed  or  briefly  elaborated  and  organised,  and 
teaching methods that prioritise the quantity of knowledge acquired rather than the critical 
education of the student, are destined to progressively lose importance.

Regarding the third area, that of specialist and trans-disciplinary training for public and 
private professionals who intend to work in the AI sector, it is important to prioritise training 
in multidisciplinary contexts, providing them with the skills that are fundamental to fully 
understand the meaning of the solutions that will be developed from time to time and 
which will be destined to have an impact on people’s lives.

49 Ref. Challenge 9 “The human being”.

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

At  the  moment,  in  addition  to  technical  experts  in  specific  disciplines  such  as  machine 
learning and data science, of fundamental importance will be transversal figures such as 
psychologists, anthropologists, sociologists and humanists in general, able to improve the 
interaction between AI and its users, fully understand how the latter can be inserted in 
the various contexts of everyday life, improving its conditions, and establish meaningful 
interconnections  between  disciplines,  so  as  to  be  able  to  create  new  generations  of 
designers who are able to create systems of technological excellence that are also able to 
generate meaning and a tangible increase in economic, cultural, social and psychological 
well-being.

There is currently a disproportion between the demand for specialist figures in the fields of 
advanced technologies and the availability of adequate skills therefore, the private sector 
is willing to pay very high salaries in order to compete in the innovation market with the 
contribution of the best talent. 

PROFESSIONS THAT DID NOT EXIST 10 YEARS AGO

46

DEVELOPER OF APP

ADMISSIONS CONSULTANT

MILLENNIALS GENERATION 
EXPERT

USER EXPERIENCE DESIGNER 

CHIEF LISTENING OFFICER 

SUSTAINABILITY EXPERT

ELDERLY ASSISTANCE EXPERT

Source: Forbes, Megan Casserly 2012

CLOUD COMPUTING SERVICES 
EXPERT

SOCIAL MEDIA MANAGER

MARKET RESEARCH DATA 
MINER

DATA SCIENTIST

DATA ARCHITECT

DATA VISUALIZER

DATA ENGINEER/OPERATOR

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

A challenge of PA will be to be able to retain researchers and professionals, albeit not being 
able to compete with the salary levels offered by the private sector50. 

The skills in administrations are in fact a determining factor for the balanced introduction 
of new technologies, for which it is important that the administrations are not dependent 
on suppliers.
Therefore, with a view to developing skills, permanent and specialist training mechanisms 
will be required at all levels. It is necessary to integrate the debate on the replacement of 
the workforce with an analysis of the new market needs and how the improvement of the 
skills of workers adequately trained on issues of AI can impact the quality of services and 
solutions offered by the market and the Public Administration.

From  a  training  point  of  view,  regardless  of  the  educational  or  professional  level,  the 
integration  of  AI  in  learning  programmes  can  contribute  to  increasing  human  abilities, 
supporting decision making and facilitating the possibility of engaging in more specialised 
or more creative activities.

47

One of the objectives of Artificial Intelligence applied to cognitive systems is precisely that 
of increasing human abilities. Therefore, It is necessary to develop a profound awareness 
of the implications of the inevitable programming and calibration errors of such systems, 
that in exalting some aspects of the information available could inadvertently deform the 
importance or meaning.

From  this  point  of  view,  Public  Administration  must  become  an  “innovation  gym”:  just 
as, thanks to the Industry Plan 4.051, companies know they have to implement resources 
and skills to keep up with the market, also PA, if it does not want to lose in capability, 
competitiveness and attractiveness, will have to envisage a plan to expand the skills of 
public employees and innovate digital services52.

50 Cade Metz, “Tech Giants are paying huge salaries for scarce AI talent”, The New York Times, 22‐ 10‐ 2017.
51 Ref. http://www.sviluppoeconomico.gov.it/index.php/it/industria40.
52 With this in mind, it will be essential to focus not only on training/updating of personnel but also on the ability to attract and retain resources with skills that can support the 
adoption of AI solutions in the public sector.

48

4

ROLE OF DATA

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

Artificial Intelligence will be greater than 
electricity and fire.
(Sundar Pichai - CEO Google)

Artificial  Intelligence  (AI)  techniques  and  tools  are  benefiting  today  from  the  enormous 
amount  of  personal  and  environmental  data  that  is  registered  daily  by  IT  systems.  The 
quality  and  interoperability  of  this  data  are  a  determining  factor  for  the  possibility  of 
applying new technologies. 
Among the main AI techniques that can be used to process such data, for example, is that 
of so-called supervised learning. In this case, the data must be “annotated” by humans 
who teach the machines how to interpret it. This operation is very onerous since it requires 
a conspicuous and complex amount of human work. In addition to the long time necessary 
to perform this annotation work, the discretion of the annotators could generate uneven 
datasets  (i.e.:  similar  data  annotated  in  a  different  way),  weakening  the  operation  of 
machines and propagating errors and biases53.
The  challenge  associated  with  the  role  of  data  is  therefore  the  creation  of  conditions, 
including  organisational  conditions,  which  allow  Artificial  Intelligence  to  use  correctly 
created databases, where consistency, quality and intelligibility are guaranteed.

In  the  Internet  of  Things  field,  one  of  the  main  challenges  to  be  addressed  is  that  the 
data  collected  by  interconnected  devices  and  sensors  is  different  from  that  with  which 
the scientific community of data-scientists has had to deal with in the past. In fact, the 
greatest successes that have been achieved in the AI field regard applications such as image 
processing,  autonomous  driving  and  web  search  that  have  been  made  possible  thanks 
to the availability of large and relatively structured datasets, able to be used therefore in 
training machine learning algorithms. 
On the contrary, data coming from a multitude of connected devices can be fragmented, 
heterogeneous and distributed irregularly in space and time: a challenge of rare complexity 
for anyone who wants to analyse data in a structured manner.
A second area of discussion is the management and research of data published on the web 
in the form of linked open data54. This data, which may regard both the institutional task of 
a public body (e.g. land registry or administrative data) as well as its operation (e.g. internal 
data) is made accessible and usable through open formats. While representing a mine of 
information, the data needs adequate tools to be exploited to its full potential. In particular, 
information retrieval55 and filtering models and methods are needed based on semantic 
technologies and shared ontologies. 

53 Ref. the “Ethical Challenge”.
54 Ref. https://www.w3.org/egov/wiki/Linked_Open_Data.
55 Information Retrieval: the set of techniques used for the targeted recovery of information in electronic format.

49

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

This work, already envisaged by the the Digital Administration Code (DAC) and launched 
within the scope of the activities of the Digital Team, will be part of the broader perspective 
of conceptual governance of public information assets.
Regarding  the  huge  data  assets  of  the  Public  Administration,  the  challenge  that  AI 
technologies allow to face is that of transforming such data into widespread and shared 
knowledge, such as to make the Public Administration transparent to citizens and above all 
to itself, guaranteeing to citizens and administrators not only semantic access to information 
and interoperability of processes, but a better understanding of the relationship between 
state and citizen.

Once the conditions for the proper functioning of the Artificial Intelligence methodologies 
have been created, one of the tasks of Public Administration will be to aggregate the data 
necessary to support process improvement. This could be achieved through the creation of 
an open platform for the collection, generation and management of certain types of data, 
directly related to Public Administration56. The decentralised use of public datasets, essential 
for the development of active participation practices (civic activism), in turn requires specific 
capabilities of governance of the socio-technical system of Public Administration. It is in 
fact essential that data quality is ensured at source, through the generalised adoption of 
guidelines and appropriate content standards.
To achieve these ambitious objectives, there are many issues to be addressed, including 
some that have been appearing in the e-government plans of developed countries for many 
years.

ISSUES TO BE FACED

truthfulness and completeness of data

data distribution and access methods

design and definition of shared ontologies

estimate of the economic value attributable 
to the data

tools  that  allow  citizens  to  monitor  data 
production

supervision of public dataset quality

management and promotion of data access56

regulation of data usage57.

The last three items of the list just presented introduce a further issue for PA: making sure 
that anyone who wants to develop Artificial Intelligence solutions useful for citizens can 
have equal and non-discriminatory access to the necessary data.

56 Ref. https://pianotriennale-ict.readthedocs.io/it/latest/doc/09_data-analytics-framework.html.
57 For example, “grand challenges” can be called. Those organised by NIST on Speech Recognition and Machine Translation, by DARPA on Autonomous Vehicles, or by ImageNet on 
Vision are famous.
58 Ref. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32016R0679.

50

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

SMART PLANNER SYSTEM

Project: Support for sustainable mobility policies
AI Technology used: Automatic planning through algorithms
Public  entities  involved:  Bruno  Kessler  Foundation,  Municipality  of  Trento, 
Municipality of Rovereto, Municipality of Bologna. 
The Smart Planner system was realized by the Bruno Kessler Foundation. 
It currently has about 15 thousand users and is used by the Province of Trento, 
the Municipality of Rovereto and is being tested in the Municipality of Bologna 
to support sustainable mobility policies. The system, released under an open 
source  license,  is  based  on  automatic  planning  AI  techniques  and  is  able 
to suggest to users that connect through an app from their smartphone the 
quickest and most ecological solutions to get to a certain destination of the city. 
Through the analysis of data intercepted by multiple sources, the app provides 
personalized indications on which public, private or shared means of transport 
should be used to reduce polluting emissions and travel times. In 2016, 30% of 
those who used the app got to the city with means of transport that they had 
never used before. 
Website: www.smartcommunitylab.it/

DANTE H2020 PROJECT - Challenge 4

Project:  automatic  data  mining  and  analysis  solutions  to  understand  how 
terrorist networks work
AI technology used: web mining
Public  entities  involved:  Ministry  of  Defence  -  General  Command  Arma  dei 
Carabinieri
The  Dante  -  DEtecting  and  ABalysing  TErrorist  project  related  to  online 
contents and financial activities - is funded by the European Commission under 
the  European  H2020  Program,  Challenge  of  Secure  Societies  and  involves 
18  European  countries,  including  Italy  that  participates  with  the  Ministry  of 
Defense and with the General Command of the Carabinieri. Through the project, 
an automated system of extrapolation of data from unstructured sources has 
been implemented, which works through AI methods and techniques applied 
to  web  mining,  able  to  identify,  retrieve,  collect  and  analyse  large  quantities 
of heterogeneous content and in more languages both on the plain web and 
on the dark and deep web to trace the operations of the terrorist networks, in 
particular financing, training and propaganda activities. This system allows to 
greatly improve and make more accurate the investigation techniques of law 
enforcement on terrorism and to trace information even on channels that are 
traditionally more difficult to investigate, such as the dark web. 
Website: www.h2020-dante.eu/

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

5

LEGAL CONTEXT

Whether our ethical substratum is Western (Aristotelian, Kantian), Oriental (Shinto, Confucian), African (ubuntu) 
or attributable to any other tradition, creating autonomous and intelligent systems that explicitly respect the 
inalienable human rights and cultural values of users , it is possible to give priority to the improvement of human 
well-being as a parameter for progress in the “algorithmic age”.                                                       (Fabiola Giannotti)

When it comes to regulating the activity of Public Administration, one of the fundamental 
problems is the balance between the interests of the community and those of the individual. 
In  the  field  of  Artificial  Intelligence  (AI),  ensuring  this  balance  is  particularly  complex. 
The most advanced AI techniques require huge amounts of data to be effective. There is 
therefore considerable economic interest in collecting sensitive data and it is necessary 
to analyse some of the main legal issues that may concern AI. Among these: the principle 
of  transparency  of  administrative  acts,  legal  liability,  privacy,  information  security  and 
intellectual property59.

Within the scope of Public Administration activities, the principle of transparency is cardinal 
and therefore must also inspire the design of new public services based on AI solutions. For 
this purpose, the criteria to be used undoubtedly include transparency of the algorithms, 
the construction logic of the databases on which they operate and defining the related 
responsibilities60.

5151

today, AI algorithms can directly influence public assessments and decisions Already, as 
well as the administrative procedures themselves. This poses a problem of accountability, 
i.e. verifying the actual legal liability upstream of certain decisions or results, posing a series 
of challenges for Public Administration:

find methods that are uniform and compatible with the current system so that the 
administration can justify its actions, also in the part processed by AI systems.
 
indicate the data sources that feed AI and through which it has made its assessments, 
and  make  the  managers  of  administrative  procedures  aware  of  the  processing 
methods used by AI systems.

To ensure utmost transparency, citizens must be enabled to understand through which 
path the AI system has reached a certain result61, in a sufficiently clear way to possibly 
recognize a calculation error and to intervene to correct it.

59 Ref. the “Ethical Challenge”.
60 For this purpose, the Digital Administration Code (DAC) has established the figure of the digital ombudsman, to whom citizens can send reports and complaints in case of 
non-compliance or violations related to the use of digital systems by public administration.
61 Jurisprudence has already established that - in the case in which algorithms are used for administrative activities - the right of access to the algorithm must always be guarante-
ed (Ref. sentence TAR Regional Administrative Court Lazio-Roma, Sect. III-bis, no. 3769/2017).

52

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

The use of sensitive data by Public Administration AI systems can compromise citizens’ 
right to privacy, as well as certain fundamental rights of the individual, in the event that 
the data collected is used to forecast events of social interest, from traffic management 
to crime prevention. One of the challenges is to avoid that the use of data by PA generates 
pervasive social control in contrast with fundamental citizens’ rights62.

As for the possible “threat” of the right to privacy, it may be necessary to implement certain 
principles and tools present in the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), 
such as the Data Protection Impact Assessment and Privacy by Design. The former requires 
those who use IT tools that may violate the right to privacy to make a prior assessment of 
the impact of these technologies on the protection of personal data. The latter is based on 
the idea that the rules on the protection of personal data must be already incorporated in 
the software design phase, ensuring that the identification data of citizens is anonymous 
or covered by pseudonym, reduced to the minimum necessary and that its use is limited to 
specific purposes. 

The challenge is clearly to find a balance between the effective use of Artificial Intelligence 
at the service of citizens and respect for their right to privacy, giving them the opportunity 
to express their informed consent to the processing of data by intelligent systems.
To ensure that the AI solutions acquired (or developed) by the Public Administration comply 
with  the  provisions  of  the  current  regulations,  it  is  necessary  to  carefully  monitor  the 
procurement procedures for goods and services. In particular, it is appropriate that - before 
the decision to contract - the administration proceeds to the comparative verification of 
the solutions available on the market, possibly proceeding to appropriate consultations. 
Furthermore, it is recommended that - in the event of a tender - the requirements and 
characteristics of AI solutions are precisely defined, with particular reference to compliance 
with  applicable  laws,  so  as  to  always  guarantee  the  legitimacy  of  the  administration’s 
activities.

GDPR

The provisions of the GDPR regulate both the responsibilities of the controller and the rights of the party 
subject to personal data processing. Regarding AI, the GDPR applies when technological systems are 
developed using personal data, and if exploited to make decisions that concern people.

Article 5 of the GDPR summarizes these principles and states that data must be: 

• processed in a lawful, transparent and fair manner (principle of legality, fairness and transparency);
• collected and used for a specific and explicitly stated reason (principle of purpose limitation);
• adequate and limited to the purposes for which it is processed (principle of data minimization);
• correct and updated (principle of accuracy);
• not archived identifiably for longer than necessary (principle related to the data retention period);
• processed in such a way as to guarantee adequate protection of personal data (principle of integrity 
and confidentiality)

62 Ref. the “Data role challenge”.

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

6

ACCOMPANYNG THE TRASFORMATION

If a typical person can do a mental task with less than one second of thought, we 
can probably automate it using AI either now or in the near future.
(Andrew Ng)

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is both a technological and social innovation, since it brings with it 
all the benefits and complexities that can radically transform society, including the public 
sector. An innovation, therefore, that can contribute to improving the quality of the services 
offered and to reinforcing the relationship of trust between administration and citizen.

The opportunities offered by the AI concern both the increase in efficiency of administration 
operations and user satisfaction. To exploit them to the fullest and to ensure that citizens 
fully understand their advantages and potential, it is also necessary to deal with issues 
concerning governance, the use of new technologies and the ability to manage data.

An aspect not to be underestimated in our country is related to the existence of a full-
bodied  role  of  “intermediaries”  in  the  relationship  between  citizens/businesses  and  the 
Public Administration, combined with a culture of “delegation” that often introduces a real 
barrier in the relationship between users and institutions.

53

In this sense, it will be desirable to invest heavily in the cultural change necessary to create 
a substrate on which to reposition, in the key of simplification and use of digital, the new 
relationship between citizens/businesses and the Public Administration. 

Furthermore,  the  transformation  process  we  are  witnessing  involves  the  creation  of  a 
culture  within  Public  Administration  that  includes  capacity  building  activities,  both  with 
respect to the presence of a leadership that promotes the use of artificial intelligence, as 
well as the capacity of public officials to implement them.

Within the scope of public services, AI can be used to optimise the internal resources of PA 
to increase the use of online services, supporting, for example, a series of activities such as:

•  completing complex tasks;
•  dispatching citizens’ requests and answering their questions;
•  effectively managing large amounts of data;
•  combining information from different datasets;
•  providing faster answers based on predictive scenarios;
•  automating repetitive processes;
•  analysing data that includes text/audio and video information63.

63 Hila Mehr, “Artificial Intelligence for Citizen Services and Government”, HARVARD Kennedy School ‐ ASH Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation, 2017.

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

TYPES OF PROBLEMS OF THE PA THAT CAN BE SOLVED BY AI APPLICATIONS

DISTRIBUTION OF RESOURCES
- Executions of activities are slowed down 
without the necessary administrative 
support.

LACK OF EXPERTS
- Answering even the simplest questions, 
takes the time of experts.

54

PROCEDURES
- Tasks are repetitive by nature.

LARGE DATASET
- Datasets are too large for employees 
to work efficiently. 
- Results and knowledge could improve 
by  combining 
internal  and  external 
datasets.

PREDICTING SCENARIOS

-  The  prediction  of  possible  scenarios 
requires long work on historical data. 
-  The  inability  to  predict  increases  the 
response  time  for  the  most  urgent 
questions.

DISSIMILAR DATA

- Data includes various information: visual/
spatial and auditory/linguistic. 
-  Qualitative  and  quantitative  data  must 
be summarized on a regular basis

Source: Artificial Intelligence and life in 2030, One hundred year study on Artificial Intelligence”, Stanford University, 2016

Finally, the integration of AI can contribute to increasing the capacity of public employees, 
as a tool  to support decision-making and without  ever  replacing human judgment.  The 
immediately  perceptible  benefit,  together  with  the  possibility  of  having  systems  that 
learn to  accompany  decisions  in an  accurate and personalised way,  is the  possibility of 
saving time for employees who can dedicate themselves to more specialised activities or 
that require greater creativity and empathy. In this way, services become more efficient, 
relations  with  citizens  are  improved  and  the  level  of  trust  in  institutions  is  increased.

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

The  introduction  of  AI  in  people’s  lives  requires  the  design  of  processes  that  facilitate 
the understanding and acceptance of technologies by the user, not only through the use 
of  experimentation  but  also  through  collaboration  mechanisms  that  allow  citizens  to 
participate in the design of AI platforms. 

Thanks  to  the  co-creation  approach,  as  happens  in  design  thinking,  users  perceive 
technology as their own and show a greater propensity to use it. Moreover, where issues 
or problems in its use are found, citizens show a greater propensity to actively participate 
in their solution64.
In facilitating the vicinity and engagement of citizens towards new AI-based public services, 
design itself plays a key role. In fact, it represents the meeting point between technology 
and people. 

Designers will have to design interfaces that do not just mimic human actions, since this 
mechanism can generate alienation, but that are able to establish a relationship of trust 
with citizens, using a language that is understandable and that puts them at ease65.

55

The challenge will be to build flexible systems able to provide answers that adapt to the 
user’s  contingent  needs,  thus  ensuring  better  and  more  efficient  services.  A  peculiar 
characteristic of AI is indeed that of correlating continuously evolving data coming from 
multiple sources and extracting dynamic response models from it. 

Another area on which the designers will have to focus will be the design of AI systems 
able  to  anticipate  the  needs  of  citizens  without  having  an  invasive  approach  that  could 
compromise the user experience.
Another crucial element for introducing AI in a structured manner in the administration 
concerns the ability to manage data and to exploit the great wealth of information that PA 
possesses, facilitating not only interoperability, but also transparency and reliability.

In light of this, it is desirable that the application of AI technologies to public administration 
aims at adopting shared ontologies in line with the internal organisation of PA and with the 
types of services to be provided, developing controlled vocabularies able to interpret and 
interoperate the databases of national interest to the fullest66.

In this regard, knowledge, representation, and self-learning systems can be a valuable aid 
in increasing the accountability of the models. The adoption of collaborative methods can 
further ensure that the models adopted are compatible with PA and remain consistent with 
the regulatory framework.

64 Medium, “The role of design in collaborative AI”, 4-11-2017.
65 Medium, “Human Design for Artificial Intelligence and Agents”, 19-10-2017.
66 Ref. http://pianotriennale-ict.readthedocs.io/it/latest/doc/04_infrastrutture-immateriali.html. 

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

In addition to the potential described above, some criticalities in the adoption of AI in the 
public sector can be identified: in general, AI systems can be implemented successfully only 
if high data quality is guaranteed.

In terms of governance, the transformation process we are witnessing also involves the 
evolution of relations between public and private players. 

Benefiting from AI in public services does not necessarily mean developing new solutions 
from scratch. On the contrary, it is possible to look at what has already been adopted by 
other governments, or draw on technologies already established on the market.

Area of collaboration between the public and private sectors is that of procurement. In this 
sense, AgID, for example, has recently started initiated comparison and experimentation of 
new scenarios for the dissemination of PCP (pre commercial procurement).

56

PCP

Pre Commercial Procurement (PCP) is an innovative purchasing formula on Research and Development 
issues, which enables procurement for new methods of relationship and discussion with the market, in 
line with the great challenges posed by a modern Public Administration67. 

The program deals with issues of significant social impact and public innovation: from autism to pro-
tection from environmental risks, to food safety and quality, as well as innovative technological so-
lutions applied to healthcare and e-government. Not only large companies but also start-ups, small 
businesses and venture capitalists have the opportunity to present innovative ideas and proposals.

The PCP is therefore a fertile ground for experimentation and research aimed at meeting social needs 
even with innovative tools related to AI. An example in this sense is the “Technologies for Autism” con-
tract aimed at identifying Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality technologies typified for people with 
an autism spectrum condition (ASC).

67 Italy is first in the ranking of EU countries for capacity to implement pre-commercial procurement.

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

PROGETTO PIERINO

Project: extraction and retrieval of online information
AI technology used: semantic analysis, information extraction
Public entities involved: Digital Humanities Research Group of the 
Bruno Kessler Foundation, Ministry of Public Education
The Pierino project (PIattaforma for the Extraction and Recovery of INformation 
Online)  was  created  by  the  Digital  Humanities  research  group  of  the  Bruno 
Kessler Foundation and Tommaso Caselli of Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam and 
led to the creation of a platform for the automatic analysis of linguistic data, 
which works through AI techniques of semantic analysis and modules for the 
automatic processing of natural language. The platform was used for the first 
time  by  the  Ministry  of  Education  to  analyse  the  data  of  public  consultation 
“The  good  school”  and  allowed  elaborating  and  summarizing  270  thousand 
comments in less than a week, allowing a significant reduction in analysis time 
of questionnaires. The platform has been designed in such a way as to be as 
flexible as possible to quickly process data from future consultations.
Website: https://dh.fbk.eu/news/collaboration-miur

57

58

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

7

PREVENTING INEQUALITIES

Technology is neither good nor bad; nor is it 
neutral.
(First law of Kranzberg)

The objective of this challenge is to pay further attention on the ways in which Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) technologies can trigger positive effects in terms of reducing the existing 
socio/economic/cultural differences.
There  are  several  areas  in  which  the  integration  of  AI  solutions  would  reduce  social 
inequalities68. 
These include:
•  education and training;
•  knowledge and guarantee of individual rights;
•  health and disability, intended as support for situations of hardship.

A significant intervention of intelligent learning support systems is conceivable in the school 
sector. There is a long tradition of using the computer for these purposes: from Computer 
Assisted Instruction (CAI) systems to Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS). 

In  ITS  there  is  always  a  student  model,  understood  as  a  knowledge  base  in  which  the 
student’s characteristics and knowledge are explicitly represented. This solution plays a 
supporting  role  as  it  provides  integration  to  traditional  teaching  systems,  helping  to  fill 
learning gaps of students with cognitive problems.

Another point of intervention in the school sector is the reduction of the linguistic gap. The 
offer of adequately modelled simultaneous translation services could help to close the gap 
generated by new waves of migration, thus offering valuable assistance to study69. Artificial 
Intelligence  technologies  could  also  play  a  decisive  role  in  the  battle  against  functional 
illiteracy70.

Furthermore, the AI   could be applied to overcome the limits imposed by the need to have 
specialist  knowledge  to  carry  out  certain  activities.  AI  systems  could  spread  access  to 
information, knowledge of rights and could facilitate the methods for exercising them by 
those who are in difficult living conditions and that do not have certain knowledge, thus 
contributing to reducing discrimination. 
This represents a very important area of   work that requires appropriate awareness raising 
and cultural promotion.

68 Ref. the “Technology Challenge”.
69 The use of artificial intelligence at the service of machine translations is now widespread (for example the cases of Google, DeepL).
70 Ref. https://www.compareyourcountry.org/pisa/country/ITA?lg=en.

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

As for the disability sector, some interesting solutions are pointed out as they can guarantee 
easier, and more usable, access to services thus, improving the quality of life of individuals. 

For example this is the case of integrated speech synthesizers for visually impaired persons, 
which could be implemented with automatic editing programs that can remember previous 
communications and provide drafts of text, or some experiments involving people suffering 
from degenerative diseases, like ALS, which provide communication systems which can 
complete and facilitate the communication process.

Considering types of AI solutions already known, the use of digital assistants could fill the 
gaps in various categories transversally: for example, thanks to AI problems such as dyslexia 
could be monitored and corrected through the use of digital assistants that can perform the 
function of the speech therapist or psychologist.

The challenge of inequalities should also be tackled from the perspective of the need to 
prevent increasing existing inequalities. 
There  are  two  levels  of  potential  discrimination,  one  involving  access  to  and  use  of  AI 
technologies and one induced by the same AI systems, based on race, gender and other 
social factors.

59

It is necessary to operate in order to ensure access to AI tools and solutions as well as to 
ensure awareness of their use, in order to avoid that only certain categories can benefit 
from these technologies. In this case, we must avoid thinking that the AI   is in itself a value, 
especially  if  its  use  is  not  accompanied  by  appropriate  interventions  aimed  at  reducing 
the possibility of creating further gaps. It should also be avoided that the AI technologies 
themselves lead to inequalities.

A PA linked to the paradigm of social responsibility should not create situations in which the 
most advanced contact methods, which are also the simplest and which guarantee greater 
accessibility of services, are the exclusive preserve of those who, by culture, propensity, 
social extraction or technological endowment are more predisposed to such uses71.

It  is  necessary  that  the  Public  Administration  carefully  manages  the  development  of  AI 
solutions on order to guarantee that:

they are inclusive, accessible, transparent and comply with legal requirements;
they do not have discriminatory profiles;
are free from bias.

71 Ref. Art. 8 of the Digital Administration Code (Legislative Decree no. 82/20015).

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

In recent times, one of the most active research areas in the field of AI has been the study 
of bias72 both from a more formal statistical point of view and from a broader legal and 
regulatory profile. 
In a positive scenario, AI systems can be used to “increase”, improve human judgement and 
reduce our conscious or unconscious biases. However, data, algorithms and other design 
choices that can influence AI systems, can reflect and amplify the cultural assumptions 
existing at a given historical moment and, consequently, inequalities.

Consequently biases become the basis for making decisions, favouring some 
scenarios 
instead  of  others,  creating  disparities  and  non-homogeneous 
distribution of opportunities73.

To do this, it is necessary to expand the bias search and mitigation strategies, not limiting 
them to a strictly technical approach. Biases, by their nature, constitute structural and long-
term distortions that require a deep interdisciplinary research in order to be faced. 

60

Addressing  and  solving  critical  issues  linked  to  bias  therefore  necessarily  requires  an 
interdisciplinary collaboration and transversal listening methods to different disciplines74.

This is where the most important game for the prevention of inequalities is played. This 
is the context in which the Public Administration has the task of intervening, addressing 
the development of AI solutions, aware of the enormous potential that these have in the 
promotion of a more widespread equity and in reducing the gaps existing in our community.

CASES OF BIAS

Some cases of bias that recently have figured prominently:
A  case  of  unconscious  bias/discrimination  is,  for  example,  the  percentage  of  male  personnel  who 
develop AI services compared to the female percentage (Ref. Global Gender Gap Report 2017 https://
assets.weforum.org/editor/AYpJgsnL2_I9pUhBQ7HII-erCJSEZ 9dsC4eVn5Ydfck.png, WEF).
Another case, within the United States courts https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-
assessments-in-criminal-sentencing (Software used in the United States with the aim of predicting 
which individuals more than others are likely to be “future criminals” - has highlighted bias/prejudice 
against people of colour.
Lastly, the extensive use of NLP techniques is rapidly showing how much the vocabularies of the most 
spoken  languages  https://www.technologyreview.com/s/602025/how-vector-space-mathematics-
reveals-the-hidden-sexism-in-language/, are strongly affected by gender bias.

72 Ref. “Ethical Challenge”.
73 Episodes of this kind have occurred in many cases: in rating algorithms, in the assignment of gig economy jobs and, in general, in algorithmically mediated work.
74 Ref. Ainow, “Expand AI bias research and mitigation strategies beyond a narrowly technical approach”, 2017, p. 2

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

MATHISIS H2020 PROJECT

Project: teaching support for children with DSA, ADHD, autism spectrum and 
multiple disability
AI Technology used: Affective Computing
Public players involved: first and second grade Italian public schools
Mathisis  -  Managing  Affective  learning  through  intelligent  atoms  and  smart 
interaction - is a project funded by the European Commission under the 2015 
Horizon2020 ICT program and involves 18 European countries, including Italy.
Through the project, a teaching support platform was created for children with 
DSA, ADHD, autism spectrum and multiple disabilities. The platform, connected 
to a webcam, a tool for the recognition of movement and a gyroscope, through AI 
techniques of affective computing recognizes the moods and levels of attention 
of students and, based on these, increases or decreases the degree of difficulty 
of the didactic exercises.
The  project  was  tested  on  a  sample  of  first  and  second  grade  Italian  public 
schools, involving just fewer than one hundred students. 
According to the first results of the experimentation, the use of this platform 
has improved the learning path of the students, increasing their concentration 
and attention levels.
Website: http://mathisis-project.eu/

61

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

8

MEASURING THE IMPACT

 The pace of change has never been this fast, yet it will 
never be this slow again.
(Justin Trudeau)

“Change has never happened this fast before, and it will never be this slow again”75. The 
introduction of new Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies in the society and, in particular, in 
the Public Administration, brings with it the natural desire to measure and understand its 
social impacts, risks and opportunities.

It is now essential to measure the impact of public policies, both in terms of the user, i.e. the 
citizen, and the PA. Regarding the first point, it is necessary to think in terms of improving 
the quality of life of people, but also the conditions of use of what is offered to them.

The  measurement  of  the  impact  in  using  Artificial  Intelligence  solutions  in  the  PA 
contemplates the use of qualitative and quantitative indicators. For example, the methods 
for measuring customer satisfaction (e.g. social impact, well-being of citizens, accessibility 
and usability of the tools) or related to the optimization of organizational processes in terms 
of efficiency and effectiveness.

62

Many quantitative models subdivide workers by their employment and try to hypothesize 
which  professions  will  be  replaced  by  technologies,  in  other  words  these  models  base 
their  operation  by  considering  jobs  and  employment  as  a  unit  of  analysis76.  However, 
technology often does not completely replace a professional figure but replaces only some 
specific activities. Workers who previously held a particular task are therefore addressed 
and  reassigned  to  complementary  activities  that  use  the  new  technologies.  Over  time, 
technology leads to a complete rethinking of organizational processes and objectives.

Given the complexity of the phenomenon to be analysed, the impact must be measured 
necessarily  taking  into  account  a  multidisciplinary  approach,  which  allows  defining  the 
impact also from an anthropological, psychological and sociological point of view, as well as 
from a technological and econometric point of view.

For this reason it is necessary to identify new sets of indicators that can better adopt this 
multidisciplinarity, in synergy with the indicators existing today.
In  any  case,  it  is  necessary  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  methods  adopted  to  measure  the 
impact can promote a better understanding of the services by the users and encourage the 
transition to new governance models77.

75 Justin Trudeau, Canadian premier, in his speech at the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting 2018 Ref. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/01/pm-keynote-remar-
ks-for-world-economic-forum-2018.
76 Ref. Challenge “Skills” and Challenge “Reducing inequalities”.
77  Ref. Challenge “Accompanying transformation”.

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

Mapping the needs and defining the impact objectives with all the actors involved, collecting 
real-time information on how all the nodes of a network interact, are the first essential 
steps in understanding and defining correct policy assessments.

Unfortunately, these assessments are not updated so frequently as they should, due to 
financial  limitations  or  unavailability  of  competent  assessors.  As  policy  assessment  is 
commonly based on data, AI could enable a faster and more accurate analysis.

A greater balance in the analysis of opportunities and risks could be an important factor to 
increase awareness of the real impact78 that AI   can have in our daily lives.

Finally, measuring the impact of these technologies is useful in terms of designing and 
developing AI, in order to guarantee reliability and transparency as well as to reduce the risk 
of errors, also as regards the Public Administration79. 
Analysing its operation allows us to determine valid models for an ethical and responsible 
use of AI.

Measurement tools must be strict to determine the effective social impacts of AI   and to 
define how these technologies can actually influence our lives.

63

ITALIAN OBSERVATORY ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 

The Italian Observatory on Artificial Intelligence is promoted by the Task Force on 
Artificial Intelligence in collaboration with the HER - Human research institute 
Ecosystems Relations and aims to analyse with various techniques - including 
Sentiment Analysis - conversations about AI in the main social networks.

78 European Commission - DG for Research and Innovation, Directorate A -Policy Development and Coordination, Unit A.6 - Open Data, Policy and Science Cloud; “Vision and Trends 
of Social Innovation for Europe”, 2017.
79 Ref. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/23542471_Spatial_diversity_in_local_government_re venue_effort_under_decentralization_A_neural‐network_approach.

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

64

Source https://ia.italia.it/en/ai-observatory/ March 2018

SIMPATICO H2020

Description:  Simplification  of  the  interaction  between  citizens  and  public 
administration
AI Technology used: Automatic language processing
Public entities involved: Bruno Kessler Foundation, Municipality of Trento
The “Simpatico-SIMplifying the interaction with Public Administration” project 
was  coordinated  by  the  Bruno  Kessler  Foundation  as  part  of  the  European 
Horizon 2020 program and consists in the application of AI solutions in the online 
offices  of  the  municipal  administrations.  In  2016,  the  Municipality  of  Trento 
started the project experimentation phase, together with the city of Sheffield 
(UK) and the region of Galicia (Spain) integrating advanced automatic language 
processing technologies, in particular AI techniques for automatic text content 
simplification, in some municipal services accessible through the Electronic Help 
Desk for citizens of the Municipality website. 
From an initial evaluation, it emerged that this integration led to:
- a reduction in the time taken to accept electronic requests of 40%
- a reduction in requests for additional information of 50% 
- a reduction in the total time required to complete an online claim of 50%. 
Website: www.simpatico-project.eu/

65

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

9

THE HUMAN BEING

Think of birds, then think of airplanes. Both fly, but they have nothing in common but a single 
fundamental characteristic: the fact that they both respect the principles of aerodynamics. This is the 
best way to compare human intelligence to artificial intelligence.
(Yoshua Bengio)

The introduction of Artificial Intelligence in the world involves existential and psychological 
issues that need to be addressed as they affect the possibility of perceiving, understanding 
and acting on the world, and how human beings are individually positioned in relation to the 
society and the environment, with substantial impacts on rights, freedom and opportunities 
for personal and professional fulfilment.

AI    is  already  present  in  many  spheres,  services  and  processes  of  our  everyday  life:  the 
technologies we use to mediate relationships with other human beings, the objects and 
places in which we live, influence behaviour, methods of working, learning, communicating, 
and having fun. All of us have, more or less consciously, faced this reality, even if on AI   there 
are still perplexities due to the lack of understanding of the technology itself and of its real 
effects in the society.

In this lack of knowledge, which is present at all levels of society and education, it is easy 
that a narration made of distorted news or influenced by despotic fiction is inserted. This 
risks to negatively affect the collective imagination, degenerating into distortions of reality 
typical of the self-fulfilling prophecy theory80.
Several  empirical  and  sociological  studies,  and  social  psychology  experiments81,  have 
repeatedly shown how radical these capabilities of intervention can be on imagination.
Therefore, these are actions that have an impact on the psychological, social and existential 
spheres.  To  accompany  citizens,  laws,  regulations  and  good  technical  and  technological 
practices are not enough (though necessary): we need a narrative and an imaginary built by 
society in an inclusive way outlining the meanings of AI   and the roles we want to assign to it.

Contemporary society, characterized by strong digitalisation, has the task of creating the 
prerequisites for which people can develop, together and responsibly, a vision of the world 
that is coherent with the innovations that these technologies bring with them. In this sense, 
the value of social sciences and of public communication is enhanced even more compared 
to the construction of a predominantly strategic narration82. If the future is the consequence 
of  the  choices  made  in  the  present  we  cannot  raise  the  issue,  leaving  unattended  the 
interpretation of technological development and of its social consequences.
There are several approaches that, in a transdisciplinary way, contribute to the construction 
of a scenario that facilitates the understanding and involvement of the human being in the 
introduction of AI solutions.

80 Ref. Robert Merton, R.K, “La profezia che si autoavvera”, in Teoria e Struttura Sociale, vol. II. Il Mulino, 1971.
81 Ref. https://www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill/2014/07/10/facebook‐experiments‐on‐users/#386 e02291c3d.
82 Ref. Challenge “Accompanying transformation”.

66

The challenges of AI at the service of citizens

Design, arts, psychology, anthropology, sociology and other humanistic disciplines can and 
must create links between research, industry and society, to support pedagogical initiatives 
capable of helping different communities to understand the boundaries and implications of 
these technologies.

On the one hand, art and design have always played a crucial role in involving people in 
a common narrative. On the other hand, they allowed the great processes of innovation 
suggested by not focusing on needs, but on aspirations83, desire and imagination. Historically, 
Art has helped to draw new imaginations and open new opportunities, raising the level of 
criticism and causing the participation and involvement of people, crossing cultures, social 
classes, professions, and skills.

This task84 is finally recognized also at European level, thanks to programs that use the arts 
to bring innovations into the common imagination, contributing to build a positive social 
meaning, which is shared and above all aware of the advantages and uses of innovations.
The  non-secondary  effect  of  this  approach  is,  in  economic  terms,  the  creation  of  new 
markets; in social terms, instead, it generates greater participation, solidarity, a sense of 
belonging to a cosmopolitan world.

Offering its citizens the opportunity to socially build a shared imagination of the role of 
technologies such as AI, is of fundamental importance not only in terms of social inclusion 
but above all as a citizenship investment. 
A conscious citizen, who understands and feels understood, is a citizen whose sense of 
belonging generates greater trust in institutions. The citizen participating in public action 
and  to  the  proposed  solutions,  inclined  to  support  and  constructive  criticism  of  the 
government activities, is able - with different levels of involvement - to support the design 
of always better systems and solutions, in an context increasingly free from digital and 
cultural divides.

Historically, Italy has played an exemplary role in innovating through beauty, aesthetics and 
well being and in stimulating leading cultural and social processes.
Innovative  by  tradition,  as  a  Nation  we  must  not  give  up  on  bringing  the  characteristic 
features of Italian style (design, creativity, aesthetics) within this narration of the system, 
still to be built but focused on the well being of people.

A vision that constitutes for our Nation an international competitive advantage, built on 
the ability to “imagine the world”. For this reason, it is necessary to create and support 
initiatives in which artists and designers work side by side with AI researchers, humanists, 
engineers and managers.

83 Ref. https://publications.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/a97a2fbd-b7da-11e7-837e-01aa75ed71a1.
84  For example, the STARTS program of the European Commission and the “Arts program” at CERN.

ITALIAN OBSERVATORY ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

Help a community grow: public consultation for the drafting of the AI White 
Paper
The AI White Paper promoted by the AI Task Force was opened to public 
consultation from 13 February to 12 March 2018 in a special section of the site 
https://ai.italia.it/.

Experts, researchers, entrepreneurs, public officials, university professors and 
citizens have contributed with suggestions, comments, and recommendations 
sharing experiences, articles and documents in different ways:
- through the appropriate section present on the sides of each paragraph of 

67

the White Paper on the Readthedocs platform;

- directly within the open threads for the purpose of the AI Task Force 

Community;

- via email intelligenza-artificiale@agid.gov.it;
- through the appropriate form prepared for reporting recommendations .

In total, the Task Force received more than 100 comments, contributions and 
recommendations, many of which were incorporated into the current version 
of the AI White Paper.

Recommendations

If I should make only one recommendation, I would say that machines will never 
have common sense. Understood as something that makes me immediately 
realise that the thing just appeared in the middle of the road is not a boulder 
jumped out from nowhere but a plastic bag; knowing that “it is better not to talk 
about this with my friend today”; imagining that a pin can be nailed on a wall 
I can also use the back of a book. Or again: I’m losing a chess match (or Go, or 
scopone scientifico...) against the computer, but I do not care because the fire 
alarm started and we all are running towards the exit while the computer is still 
calculating its next move, chained to its fate.

Luciano Floridi

Recommendations

Here is a list of recommendations, drawn up taking into account the 9 challenges presented 
in this document and the suggestions received through the public consultation.
These recommendations are not to be considered definitive or immutable, but they evolve 
with the continuous public debate on Artificial Intelligence.

69

1

2

3

4

5

Promote a national platform dedicated to the development of AI solutions in 
order to: 
- promote the collection of annotated data, codes and learning models;
- organize and convey tests openly before the release of AI   systems used in 

the PA in order to evaluate their behaviour and limit the anomalies and the 
amplification of the bias;

- offer adequate computing resources to experiment with techniques and solutions;

Disclose  to  the  public  the  intermediate  results  of  the  elaboration  of  AI 
algorithms (ex. parameters of neural networks) operated on data from public 
administrations, subject to conditions that may harm the privacy and security 
of citizens. These results must allow the reproducibility of the processes, their 
evaluation and verifiability. 

Enable with new resources the computational linguistic systems for the Italian 
language  (such  as  digitized  lexicons  or  annotated  corpora)  to  be  distributed 
with open licenses, in order to favour the development of services based on the 
treatment of natural language;

Develop adaptive customization and recommendation systems that facilitate 
interaction  with  the  services  offered  by  public  administrations  based  on  the 
specific requirements, needs and characteristics of citizens. These systems can 
also be used to identify critical issues that hinder the improvement of public 
services;

Promote the creation of a National Competence Centre that is a point of reference 
for the implementation of AI in the PA and that can provide predictions of impact 
and measurement of the social and economic effects of AI systems, in order to 
enhance the positive effects and reduce risks. The centre of competence must 
also propose a Manifesto with the cardinal principles of the implementation of 
AI in the PA;

Recommendations

6

7

8

9

Facilitate the dissemination of skills through the promotion of certification of 
professionals working in the area of AI   (through the creation and adoption of a 
shared framework ) and provide for the establishment of training paths for the 
inclusion of workers with ability to understand and implement AI solutions in 
the public administration (for example through specific courses at the National 
School  of  Administration).  The  numerous  professional  skills  lacking  are  an 
opportunity  to  think  about  training  courses  focus  on  lasting  and  sustainable 
gender equality, both from a numerical point of view (ex. STEM graduates) and 
from a financial point of view (ex. remuneration equality); 

Provide  a  PA  4.0  plan  to  encourage  PA  investments  in  AI  solutions  starting 
from a call for challenges through open innovation tools and procurement for 
innovation;

Support  the  collaboration  between  research,  business  accelerators  and 
innovation hubs, both public and private, also at European level, to promote the 
adoption of AI solutions in the public sector; 

Establish a Trans-disciplinary Centre on AI, in synergy with the Skills Centre, 
which will have the following tasks:
- promote and disclose the debate on the evolution of ethics; 
- support critical reflection on emerging ethical issues; 
- improve the conditions for involving experts and citizens to transform technical 
and social considerations into regulations, standards and technical solutions.

10

Define guidelines and processes based on the principle of security-by-design in 
the use of AI, increasing the levels of control and facilitating the sharing of data 
on cyber attacks to and from AI by all European countries.

70

And now? The first steps for an AI-ready PA

All life is about problem solving. 
(Karl Popper)

This section represents a list of suggestions that is definitely not exhaustive on what could 
be the first steps that the Public Administrations, also through the support of AgID, can 
follow to start implementing AI or to fully exploit its potential, without incurring the risks 
raised in the challenges of this White Paper.
Some tools are already used by the administrations that feed them in daily life to increase 
the efficiency and effectiveness of services; in other cases, it is necessary to think of new 
ones, precisely to cope with the lack of adequate solutions of Artificial Intelligence that 
support the administration in the administrative activity and in the management of services.
In  this  paragraph,  we  aim  to  indicate  a  small  “toolbox”,  a  starting  point  pending  more 
operational steps and paths that can give a more solid and clear context to new technological 
solutions,  sustainable  implementation  of  Artificial  Intelligence  really  at  the  service  of 
citizens.

71

AREA OF APPLICATION OF AI SOLUTIONS
Public administrations and dedicated project teams faced with the issue of the 
role that AI can play in the management of their activities must move from a 
starting point: AI is not always a panacea and is not suitable for any type of 
challenge. 
Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  analyse  in  advance  which  internal  processes  or 
services to citizens can be facilitated by the use of technologies based on AI and, 
at that point, develop the expectations and impact in relation to the support that 
can derive in terms of efficiency and/or fairness.

WELL-PLANNED INITIAL INVESTMENTS
Once  the  Public  Administrations  have  identified  the  areas  in  which  AI  can 
really  help,  it  is  necessary  to  reflect  on  the  resources  they  need,  starting 
with  the  budget  necessary  to  implement  the  new  technologies,  followed 
by  the  involvement  of  experts  (external  or  even  internal  if  appropriately 
formed)  that  know  the  most  suitable  AI  technology  for  the  need  expressed.
Furthermore, the Administrations cannot take into account the time necessary 
for  the  internal  structure  to  implement  the  AI  solutions  identified,  especially 
when large quantities of data and information must be uploaded to develop them.

72

The Task Force of the Italian Digital Agency remains available to explore forms 
of co-financing and identification of the needs of the Administration through the 
email intelligenza-artificiale@agid.gov.it.

LET’S NOT FORGET THE THREE-YEAR PLAN
AI  requires  accelerating  the  path  of  digital  transformation.  The  Three-Year 
Plan  provides  all  the  indications  to  build  the  foundations  on  which  it  will  be 
possible to implement AI solutions. There are already many tools useful for the 
implementation of the Three-Year Plan, such as the minimum measures for ICT 
security to public administrations, which must be adopted to counter the most 
common and frequent threats to which their information systems are subject.
Or  the  many  procurement  channels  that  can  be  activated,  depending  on  the 
financial perimeter and the diversified technical needs: from the more classic 
appeal  to  the  Electronic  Market  for  Public  Administration  (MEPA)  and  to  the 
Public Connection System (SPC), in particular, lot 3 on Interoperability for data 
and  application  cooperation  and  lot  4  on  the  creation  and  management  of 
portals, APP, websites and web applications), up to the procurement tools for 
innovation.
In  particular,  on  this  last  front,  the  references  are  those  of  pre-commercial 
procurement  (PCP,  both  on  a  national  scale  also  in  the  context  of  regional 
planning  through  European  funds)  and  finally  to  the  public  procurement  of 
services and innovative products (PPI).

START “SMALL”
As with many other technologies, it is advisable to test the AI on a small scale 
before applying it at full capacity in its activities.
Developing a pilot program allows those who decide to implement AI solutions 
to  become  familiar  with  the  technology  and  to  correct  any  errors  during 
development thus allowing the service itself to improve.
There  are  several  models  that  can  be  used  to  set  up  projects  in  an  agile 
manner: the site designers.italia.it provides a tailor-made kit for the PA for the 
development and design of projects. 
In addition, AI involves a series of risks, well highlighted in the various challenges 
of the White Paper, related to data protection and privacy, ethical dilemmas, the 
risk of bias deviations. In order to limit current and future problems as much 
as  possible,  it  is  a  good  practice  to  involve  the  entities  involved  in  AI-based 
services from the pilot project, exposing data and algorithms in a transparent 
and replicable manner.

WORK ON DATA
It is useful to start from the need of AI to feed on data, at the base of every 
application of these technologies. For this reason, a typical challenge faced by 
those who use AI is the access, availability and quality of data.
The higher the quality of the data, the better the accuracy and performance 
of the AI system will be. However, public data is often collected by different 
administrations  and,  in  many  cases,  it  is  fragmented,  limited  and  not  easily 
accessible.
Thus, all administrations must ensure the quality and usability of the data they 
provide, so as to be easily employed to test, use and refine AI systems.
Useful  tools,  modelled  on  the  needs  of  the  PA  for  the  use  of  data,  their 
interpretation and procedures for release, are the site dati.gov.it and the National 
Guidelines for the Valorisation of Public Information Assets.

DEVELOPMENT OF PROFESSIONALISM AND SKILLS 
Universities have great expertise in the AI sector, with dedicated R&D projects 
and programs, in addition to the new training and teaching offer of courses and 
the establishment of ad hoc departments.
At the same time, administrations need substantial investment in human capital 
to manage the growth and potential of new technological systems.
Universities and the public sector in general should face the possible lack of AI-
related skills with synergy and identify new models for working with AI experts 
from the private sector and academic world. 
On the ai.italia.it portal, a mapping of AI-related courses in Italy will soon be 
available. 
In the meantime, the evolution of the Italian ecosystem can be observed (https://
ia.italia.it/en/ai-in-italy/)  related  to  start-ups,  research  centers  and  other 
realities that deal with the production or use of AI solutions.

73

STAY UPDATED
The reference portal of the Artificial Intelligence Task Force, ai.italia.it will remain 
active  and  updated  with  the  initiatives  that  will  be  deployed  in  the  coming 
months. It is advisable to consult it frequently and to subscribe to the newsletter 
to stay updated on developments and news.
The community will also remain active, where it is possible to participate in open 
(or start new) discussions on issues related to the Task Force activity and to AI 
in general.
For  any 
intelligenzaartificiale@agid.gov.it

information  or  any  collaboration,  there 

is  always  the  email 

