National approach to  
artificial intelligence

Illustrations: Itziar Castany Ramirez
Production: Ministry of Enterprise and Innovation
Article no: N2018.36

Contents

National approach to artificial intelligence 

Education and training 

Research 

Innovation and use 

Framework and infrastructure 

4 

6

7

8

10

National approach to  
artificial intelligence

Sweden aims to be the world leader in harnessing the opportunities offered by digital transformation. By international standards, 
Sweden is in the vanguard. Many 
countries have high ambitions 
for their digital development and 
Sweden must work hard to advance and strengthen its efforts. 
If Sweden succeeds, there will 
be considerable scope to develop 
Swedish competitiveness and welfare. One rapidly evolving field 
of digital technology is artificial intelligence (AI).1 AI is a broad 
field that encompasses many technologies, not least machine learning and deep learning. What 
distinguishes AI from other automation methods is the ability of 
AI technology to learn and become smarter over time. 

Against this background, the Government has identified the need 
to develop a national approach 
to AI in Sweden. The purpose of 
this document is to identify an 
overall direction for AI-related 
work in Sweden and lay the foundation for future priorities. 

AI has the potential to contribute significant benefits in a variety 
of areas through increased economic growth, and solutions to environmental and social challenges. According to some studies, the 
use of AI has great potential to 
increase economic growth.2 Examples of the contributions that 
AI can make are already evident: 
AI can help to better identify diseases, lower energy consumption, 
reduce traffic accidents, create 

 1There is no one single, clear-cut or generally accepted definition of artificial intelligence, but many definitions. In 

general, however, AI refers to intelligence demonstrated by machines. Vinnova (Sweden’s innovation agency) (2018) 

(Artificiell intelligens i svenskt näringsliv och samhälle. (Artificial intelligence in Swedish business and society). Inte
rim report 12 February 2018, Reg. no 2017-05616. 

2 Vinnova (Sweden’s innovation agency) (2018) Artificiell intelligens i svenskt näringsliv och samhälle. (Artificial intelli
gence in Swedish business and society). Interim report 12 February 2018, Reg. no 2017-05616.

4       National approach to artificial intelligence

new services, streamline industrial 
production, develop new pharmaceutical products and shorten processing times. 

Although AI is rapidly evolving, 
this does not mean that the benefits of AI will automatically 
be realised in Sweden. For AI to 
best contribute to strengthened 
Swedish competitiveness and enhanced welfare, Sweden must create the enabling conditions.

It is important that Sweden can 
manage the challenges associated 
with AI. AI will affect how people 
work, when some tasks can be automated and new tasks emerge. 
There may be unintended or unforeseen consequences of using AI 
as a result of biased or manipulated data, lack of transparency, misuse or hostile use. This may lead 
to discrimination, loss of trust, financial damage and consequences 
for the functioning of democracy. 
For these reasons, it is important 
for Sweden to work actively on the 
issues that AI is already raising.

The countries that succeed in harnessing and realising the benefits 
of AI while managing the risks in 
a responsible manner will have a 
great competitive advantage internationally. Furthermore, AI has 
considerable potential to contribute to a more effective and relevant public sector. This is why 
the Government’s goal is to make 
Sweden a leader in harnessing 
the opportunities that the use of 
AI can offer, with the aim of strengthening Sweden’s welfare and 
competitiveness. 

The goal is closely linked to the 
digital transformation goal adopted by the Riksdag and complements the Government’s Digital 
Strategy. 

Key conditions for realising  
the potential of AI
For Swedish society to realise the 
potential of AI, a number of conditions play a particularly important role. These conditions are 
summarised in Figure 1.

Sweden needs to develop its longterm supply of knowledge and expertise in the field of AI if it wants 
to reap the benefits of AI. The 
need for relevant knowledge of AI 
must be met through education 
and training, continuing education and research. Innovation and 
use initiatives are also needed to 
promote early application projects. 
Sweden also needs to ensure access 
to data and infrastructure, such as 
computational capacity, in addition 
to appropriate national, European 
and international frameworks. 

” The Government’s goal 
is to make Sweden a  
leader in harnessing the 
opportunities that the 
use of AI can offer, with 
the aim of strengthening 
Sweden’s welfare and 
competitiveness.”

The active promotion of AI applications in public sector activities can play a significant role in 
how the public sector succeeds in 
responding to major social challenges of the future. Public stakeholders should therefore actively 
support AI applications by making relevant data available and 
creating national digital infrastructure, taking security and integrity issues into account. 

A cross-cutting theme should be 
sustainable AI, meaning that AI 
applications should be ethical, 
safe, secure, reliable and transparent. This applies in particular to critical systems and systems 
that may affect the physical world, 

Figure 1. Key conditions for use of AI in Sweden.

Education  
and training

Research

Innovation and use

Framework and infrastructure

such as self-driving vehicles or  
AI applications in health care. In 
AI applications, ethical, safety  
and security considerations cannot be an afterthought; they must 
be an integral part of the early  
design stage.  

If Sweden can strengthen these 
conditions, it will be well placed 
to offer an internationally attractive working environment for 
business, researchers and others 
interested in AI research, development and use. 

The purpose of this national approach is to identify some of the 
most important conditions for 
societal stakeholders to manage together in relation to AI. For 
Sweden to reap the benefits of AI, 
all sectors of society must be involved; this is not an issue that the 
state, municipalities, county councils, academia or private companies can deal with on their own. 

National approach to artificial intelligence       5

Education and training

The Government’s assessment is that

• 

• 

• 

Swedish higher education institutions need to provide a sufficient 
number of people with AI education and training, particularly in 
continuing and further education for professionals with a university 
degree or equivalent. 

Sweden needs a strong AI component in non-technical programmes 
to create the conditions for broad and responsible application of the 
technology. 

Sweden needs a strong link between research, higher education and 
innovation in the field of AI.

It is essential that a sufficient 
number of people have the skills 
required to develop and use AI 
technology if the whole of Sweden 
is to benefit from AI. AI knowledge and expertise must be available throughout society – in 
large and small businesses, in municipalities, county councils and 
government agencies. Using the 
same broad approach, Sweden 
also needs to enhance cyber security expertise. Today, there is a 
shortage of people with AI expertise both in Sweden and around 
the world, resulting in stiff international competition for qualified 
people. As the use of AI increases, the shortage of expertise is 
likely to become more and more 
tangible. If broader use of AI is 
to become a reality, it is essential 
that Sweden educates and trains a 
sufficient number of people in the 
field. 

Sweden’s higher education institutions are already developing their 
educational offer to meet the digital challenge. Engineering pro
grammes in particular are highly 
relevant in this initial phase of 
work. However, the many uses of 
AI justify a wider interdisciplinary perspective on the programmes that are included. Interdisciplinary knowledge is crucial in 
ensuring ethical, safe, secure and 
sustainable use of AI. Relevant AI 
knowledge is not only essential 
for technical experts but also for 
leaders, managers and other professionals who interact with technology.

The rapid development of AI creates an increased need for lifelong 
learning. Opportunities for relevant continuing and further education for practising professionals 
are therefore necessary. According 
to Vinnova’s (Sweden’s innovation 
agency) assessments, there is a particularly large need, in the short 
term, for continuing and further 
AI education for people with a 
university degree. Closer collaboration between several societal 
actors is needed to address this. 

6       National approach to artificial intelligence

Increasingly rapid technological 
and societal development will require a very strong relationship 
between research, higher education and innovation in AI.  

Research

The Government’s assessment is that

• 

• 

• 

• 

Sweden needs both strong basic research and strong applied research in AI to ensure knowledge and skills supply in the field.

Sweden needs strong relations with leading international AI research 
environments.

Sweden needs strong collaboration between business, the public 
sector and research in AI.

Sweden needs to exploit the synergies between civil research and 
defence research from a total defence perspective.

Strong research in AI is essential 
for Sweden to realise the opportunities the technology creates. 
Strong basic research creates new 
knowledge that applied research 
can build on to solve specific problems, for example. It is important that both basic research and 
applied research, closely linked together, are conducted in Sweden 
to strengthen Swedish skills supply and competitiveness.

AI and machine learning research 
is technologically advanced and 
specialised, and increasingly involves multiple disciplines. Internationally, major investments are 
being made in AI research,  
especially in the United States and 
China. In Sweden, a large share 
of the central government research appropriations goes to basic 
research that is related in varying degrees to AI, such as computer science and mathematics, and 
primarily conducted at the technology-focused higher education 
institutions. In November 2017, 
the Knut and Alice Wallenberg 

Foundation (KAW) also announced that it would donate SEK 1 
billion to AI research. This represents a significant contribution to 
Swedish research in this field.

al opportunities for coordination 
between civil research and defence research, including cybersecurity and autonomous systems, that 
should be seized.

Most of the world’s leading AI 
research is conducted beyond 
Sweden’s borders. If Sweden is 
to be at the forefront of AI research, it is important to maintain 
and develop cooperation with 
research environments in other 
countries. The EU plays a major 
role in Swedish research, not least 
through the EU Framework Programme for Research and Innovation. 

Both the public and private sectors are very interested in harnessing and commercialising new 
research findings on AI. Innovative AI research will be able to 
contribute to exports, enhanced 
public services and new jobs. At 
the same time, it is important that 
AI systems are carefully designed 
to prevent them from doing harm. 
It is therefore important that companies and public institutions 
collaborate with relevant academic environments, for example 
through joint projects or staff exchanges. It is also important to 
promote the development of AI 
by linking it to the skills available in Sweden around large-scale 
computations with high-performance computing.

AI is also a growing field in defence research. There are potenti
National approach to artificial intelligence       7

Innovation and use

The Government’s assessment is that

• 

• 

• 

Sweden needs pilot projects, testbeds and environments for development of AI applications in the public and private sectors, that can 
contribute to the use of AI evolving in a safe, secure and responsible 
manner.  

Sweden needs to continue to develop efforts to prevent and manage 
the risks associated with AI. 

Sweden needs to develop partnerships and collaborations on the use 
of AI applications with other countries, especially within the EU.

The opportunities that AI offers 
only create value when the technology is widely used in the private 
and public sectors. Companies in 
all industries could develop their 
competitiveness with the help of 
AI. Most companies will also need 
to decide on their approach to AI 
as its impact on businesses and industries will be profound. There is 
great potential in the public sector 
to develop activities and public services in the citizens’ interest with 
the help of AI. It is therefore in 
Sweden’s interest to stimulate innovative applications and use of AI in 
society in various ways. 

Pilot projects, testbeds and other 
specialised testing environments 
are among the tools that may be 
important in accelerating the introduction of new AI technology 
in an ethical, safe, secure and sustainable manner. Through projects to develop new AI applications, research findings can be put 
to practical use, adapted to real 
conditions, evaluated and made 
more widely available. 

AI also entails risks. These may include new types of intelligent cyber-attacks or manipulated data that 
can have serious consequences. AI 
may also lower the thresholds for 
attacks against democratic practices 
such as through disinformation. 

The risks associated with AI are 
not only technical but also ethical, particularly with regard to 
applications in the public sector. 
The use of AI algorithms must be 
transparent and comprehensible. 
The use of AI requires account 
to be taken of moral and legal issues, and presents challenges related to rule of law procedures and 
the automation of agency decisions. A widely discussed ethical 
issue is how an autonomous vehicle should reason and act if, in 
an emergency, it is forced to choose between two outcomes, both of 
which mean that people might be 
injured. Sweden can take the lead 
in ethical, safe, secure and sustainable use of AI by actively working on this issue nationally and 
promoting it internationally. 

The potential benefits of AI can 
be enormous in both the private and public sector, even if it is 
difficult to quantify them today. 
Public sector innovation projects 
where AI tools are adapted and 
used, and where skills enhancement takes place, can have a significant impact on the effectiveness 
and quality of activities. 

Sweden’s public sector has an almost unique volume of high quality data, which is often a prerequisite for AI applications and if 
properly managed can contribute 
to creating considerable benefits. 
Examples of AI applications are 
already emerging from government agencies, county councils and 
municipalities. There can therefore 
be added value in harnessing these 
new opportunities for developing 
and providing public services in 
different parts of the public sector.

Sweden is a small country with 
a small domestic market. At the 
same time, many countries are investing heavily in AI. Sweden will 

8       National approach to artificial intelligence

therefore need to develop partnerships with prominent players 
in other countries. In this context, 
the EU is an important arena. 
However, international cooperation must consider national security interests and the division of 
competences between the EU and 
its Member States.

National approach to artificial intelligence       9

Framework and infrastructure

The Government’s assessment is that

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Sweden needs to develop rules, standards, norms and ethical  
principles to guide ethical and sustainable AI and the use of AI. 

Sweden needs to push for Swedish and international standards and 
regulations that promote the use of AI and prevent risks. 

Sweden needs to continuously review the need for digital  
infrastructure to harness the opportunities that AI can provide.

Sweden needs to continue the work on making data available to  
serve as infrastructure for AI use in areas where it adds value. 

Sweden needs to continue to play an active role in the EU’s efforts 
to promote digitisation and reap the benefits that the use of AI can 
bring. 

In light of the societal transformation that AI entails, it is important 
to work for a coherent and strategic AI policy that aims to create 
a safe, secure and favourable climate for digitisation and harnessing the opportunities of AI. The 
development and use of AI need 
to be guided by norms and ethical principles aimed at harnessing 
the benefits while minimising the 
risks to both society and individuals. This is not only a matter for 
researchers and engineers but for 
a wide range of professions. 

Access to data is the lifeblood of 
AI and a crucial part of the infrastructure. As societies become 
increasingly digital, a growing volume of data is available in digital 
form. This includes manually and 
automatically collected data, such 
as data from sensors. Extensive 
efforts are often required to pro
duce usable data. Risks may arise 
in the form of incorrect or otherwise undesirable outcomes if data 
is of low quality, for example as a 
result of registration errors, systematic (intentional and unintentional) errors in data collection, 
source selection or data labelling. Appropriate frameworks of 
principles, norms, standards and 
rules are therefore important prerequisites if Sweden is to realise 
the benefits of AI in society. Such 
frameworks must balance fundamental needs for privacy, ethics, 
trust and social protection with 
access to the data needed to realise the potential of AI. 

Regulatory frameworks at European and international level, for 
example cross-border data transfer rules, are also important. The 
EU’s General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR),3 which app
3Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of  

natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repea
ling Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).

10       National approach to artificial intelligence

lies from 25 May 2018, provides 
strong privacy protection in personal data processing and for this 
reason is an important part of the 
AI framework. How different stakeholders are able to implement 
the GDPR in their respective activities will play a major role in how 
well Sweden is able to manage 
both the benefits and risks of AI.

In such a rapidly evolving field 
of technology as AI, guidelines 
and standards will be needed at 
an early stage to guide both private and public stakeholders. AI 
standards have the potential to 
promote technical, semantic, legal 
and other forms of interoperability both within and between companies and public institutions, and 
to contribute to greater clarity for 
users and consumers. 

Different types of infrastructure 
are also important for the development and use of AI. For example, certain parts of AI development require access to large 
volumes of data and extensive 

computational capacity. Sweden’s 
supercomputer resources at 
Swedish higher education institutions that are collected under the 
Swedish National Infrastructure 
for Computing (SNIC) are an important resource in this context. 

Many of the regulatory frameworks and guidelines that 
Sweden must take into account 
come from the EU. If Sweden is 
to be able to benefit from initiatives taken within EU frameworks, 
it is important that structures and 
expertise are in place. Sweden therefore needs to take part in the European AI debate and play an active role in EU efforts to reap the 
benefits that use of AI can bring. 

National approach to artificial intelligence       11
