MARCH 2019

National Strategy for 
Artificial Intelligence

Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Industry, Business and Financial Affairs

MARCH 2019

National Strategy for 
Artificial Intelligence

Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Industry, Business and Financial Affairs

Indhold

1. 

Vision and goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

5

2. 

Good starting point – but challenges as well  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

13

 

Focus areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

I. 

A responsible foundation for artificial intelligence   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

II.  More and better data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

III.  Strong competences and new knowledge  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

IV. 

Increased investment in artificial intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

23

25

33

43

51

 

Priority areas  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

61

1  Vision and goals 

Denmark is to be a front-runner in responsible development and 
use of artificial intelligence.

Over the years, the use of new technology has led to many advances, and globally, 
technological development has forged significantly better living conditions for many people. 

Denmark has been quick to grasp the opportunities brought by new technology to generate 
economic growth and welfare for everyone. 

There have been rapid developments within artificial intelligence in recent years. The major 
breakthrough with artificial intelligence is that it enables computers to learn without human 
intervention. Artificial intelligence uses data and algorithms – mathematical formulae – to 
mimic the way humans learn, make decisions and solve problems. The technology is already 
available in Danes’ lives, for example when they are navigating in traffic, listening to music on 
their mobiles or searching the internet. 

Today, artificial intelligence is primarily used for simple tasks in a single limited area, e.g. 
image recognition. On the other hand, the task is usually carried out at a speed and precision 
that far exceeds human ability.

In the slightly longer term, artificial intelligence is likely to be able to learn to perform more 
tasks within different areas. For example, this could be a housekeeping robot that can learn to 
vacuum and clean up without necessarily having to be programmed to perform the individual 
tasks. 

There is currently intense work being undertaken aimed at achieving this broader form of 
artificial intelligence, as there are great potentials in the technology. In order to influence 
this development, it is vital that we strengthen the development of artificial intelligence in 
Denmark. 

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

5

What is artificial intelligence? 

Artificial intelligence is systems based on algorithms (mathematical formulae) that, by 
analysing and identifying patterns in data, can identify the most appropriate solution. 
The vast majority of these systems perform specific tasks in limited areas, e.g. control, 
prediction and guidance. The technology can be designed to adapt its behaviour by 
observing how the environment is influenced by previous actions.

Artificial intelligence is used in a number of areas, e.g. search engines, voice and image 
recognition, or to support drones and self-driving cars. Artificial intelligence can be a 
crucial element to increase productivity growth and to raise the standard of living in the 
years to come.

Source: The OECD and the European Commission, 2018

In the long term, artificial intelligence that resembles human intelligence could be developed. 
Today, there are still large differences between the human ability to learn new things and 
reflect, and a computer’s ability to do the same with artificial intelligence. It is impossible to 
say for certain when – or whether at all – we will reach a point where computer technology 
can reason at a human level. 

This government strategy takes its outset in the current level of development of artificial 
intelligence. The strategy paves the way for how we can get the most out of the potentials in 
this technology within a foreseeable number of years. As the technology develops, there will 
be a need for new approaches and initiatives that we cannot necessarily predict today. 

It is important that Denmark exploit the opportunities in artificial intelligence, so that we 
support the competitiveness of Danish businesses, so that Denmark can remain one of 
the wealthiest countries in the world, and so that the public sector can provide world-class 
services. 

For example, the technology can help the individual citizen to translate and read texts in 
different languages, navigate in traffic, and reduce and tailor energy consumption at home 
according to individual needs.

With regard to businesses, artificial intelligence could help create new and more efficient 
business models, e.g. by planning transport routes, thereby reducing time spent on logistics, 
and by identifying errors in reports to banks, insurance companies and pension companies. 

In the public sector, artificial intelligence can support improved services, e.g. quicker 
diagnoses of illnesses; it can develop better and more accurate traffic control systems, and it 
can provide citizens with smarter and simpler communication with the public sector. 

 

6 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

Artificial intelligence will change the way in we work. It will place new demands, but it will also 
provide opportunities to learn new things and perform tasks more efficiently. Denmark has 
have a flexible labour market and a well-educated and agile workforce with a positive attitude 
towards new technology. This is a good basis for getting everyone on board. 

The Danish population has a high degree of trust in each other, and we are generally positive 
towards digital and technological development. However, the rapid development may make 
some feel insecure about the future. Therefore the government considers it crucial that 
Danes continue to feel secure and to be confident that developments in society and in the 
use of artificial intelligence will centre on our shared values of freedom, liberty, security and 
equality.

The government's vision

Denmark is to be a front-runner in responsible 
development and use of arti(cid:11)cial intelligence.

When artificial intelligence supports people, e.g. in making a decision, it is vital that we 
ensure that our values are in focus at all times. We have to place the same requirements on 
algorithms as we do on an employee. 

The algorithms must ensure equal treatment by being objective, fair and impartial of personal 
conditions. This means that artificial intelligence must not reflect prejudices or biases against 
gender, disability or ethnic origin. Furthermore, it is important to ensure that the data used by 
artificial intelligence is correct. 

Artificial intelligence should help us to analyse, understand and make better decisions. 
However, the technology cannot, and should not, replace people or make decisions for us. For 
example, a physician should still make the final diagnosis for a patient. Trust grows between 
people, and new technologies must not be allowed to change this. Artificial intelligence must 
be used responsibly. 

Therefore, the government will promote the use of artificial intelligence as a supplement to 
human decision-making, in order to exploit the benefits without compromising our social 
values.

Denmark is one of the world’s most digitised countries. Denmark will use this stronghold 
to attract knowledge and technologies as well as influence the development of responsible 
artificial intelligence in close cooperation with the other Nordic and European countries. If 
Denmark and Europe fail to act quickly and with care, we will lose both our competitive edge 
and influence on developing artificial intelligence.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

7

In December 2018, the European Commission presented an action plan for artificial 
intelligence. The government will work to generate support from the other EU Member States 
to exploit the potentials in the technology responsibly to benefit European citizens and 
businesses.

Europe and Denmark should not copy the US or China. Both countries are investing heavily in 
artificial intelligence, but with little regard for responsibility, ethical principles and privacy. 

Denmark will focus on responsibility and ensure a good framework to exploit the growth 
potential in artificial intelligence in the sectors in which Denmark already has international 
strongholds so that Denmark can remain at the forefront. 

Objectives for artificial intelligence

The government sets four objectives in this National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence for how 
Denmark can be a front-runner in responsible development and use of artificial intelligence. 

1. Denmark should have a common ethical and human centered basis for 
artificial intelligence

Artificial intelligence must be developed and used within the relevant legislation, and with 
respect for the rights of citizens. This means that businesses and the public authorities must 
have strong focus on data ethics, which, among other things, include responsibility, security 
and transparency in the use of artificial intelligence. 

The goals of the government are that:

•  Ethical principles are incorporated in the development and use of artificial intelligence to 

secure respect for individuals and their rights, and for democracy.

•  Denmark attracts knowledge and projects by being among the best in the EU at exploiting 

opportunities to develop and use responsible artificial intelligence.

• 

Internationally, Denmark works actively to ensure that responsibility is a guiding principle in 
the use and development of artificial intelligence.

 

8 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

2. Danish researchers should research and develop artificial intelligence

In order to support the development of artificial intelligence, Denmark must strengthen 
research efforts further. Researchers in Denmark will research artificial intelligence through 
basic research and more application-oriented research to pave the way for development of 
useful technological solutions for the individual, businesses and the public sector. Enhanced 
research efforts will also help ensure that Denmark can influence the development of artificial 
intelligence in the long term so that it is shaped according to Danish values.

The goals of the government are to:

•  Prioritise research into digital technologies such as artificial intelligence further in the years 

to come.

•  Establish better access to high-quality data for researchers in artificial intelligence.

•  Support a good framework for attracting, developing and retaining research talents within 

artificial intelligence in Denmark.

3. Danish businesses should achieve growth through developing and using 
artificial intelligence

Realising the potentials in artificial intelligence also requires that Danish businesses invest 
in the technology and have access to the right resources and competences. There is also 
an ambition for Danish businesses to exploit the focus of the strategy on responsible use of 
artificial intelligence in their business models, so that this can be a competitive advantage both 
nationally and internationally. 

The goals of the government are that:

•  Denmark is among the best in the world at exploiting data and new business models based 

on responsible development and use of artificial intelligence.

•  Businesses increase their investment in responsible artificial intelligence.

•  Danish businesses have better access to employees with digital skills, to data and to the 

latest research within artificial intelligence. 

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

9

4. The public sector should use artificial intelligence to offer world-class 
services

Artificial intelligence will be used to improve public services with outset in the needs of 
citizens. The public sector will also use artificial intelligence to support faster and more 
efficient case processing.

The goals of the government are that:

•  The public sector will be among the leading countries in Europe in using data and artificial 

intelligence to improve and target public services.

•  The public sector works systematically on a framework and methods to support responsible 

use of artificial intelligence so that investments and solutions are utilised as well as 
possible. 

•  The authorities have a good framework to utilise data to develop artificial intelligence.

  10 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

Examples of the benefits of using artificial intelligence in the 
short term

For the individual

•  More individualised treatment of the
  sick, e.g. through identification of citizens  
  with heart attack by using advanced voice  
 

recognition for emergency calls

•  Better search for information and route   
  planning.

•  Better technical aids helping citizens to    
  write, read and hear (intelligent hearing   
  aids, reading aloud etc.).

For businesses

 
•  Less time wasted by transport and  
 
logistics firms because they can predict   
  when consumers will buy products and   
  thereby prepare the products for shipping  
  even before consumers order them.

•  Identification of errors in reportings
 
  companies and pension funds.

from customers at e.g. banks, insurance   

For the public sector

 
•  Better service for citizens and case  
 
  support in public administration, e.g.  
  at Udbetaling Danmark (the Danish  
 
  authority for payments of benefits etc.),  
 
in the employment area and at citizen  
 
  service centres in Danish municipalities.
 
•  Better digital customer experiences, e.g.   
  help to check prices or to pay bills.

 
 

•  Development of intelligent conveyor  
  belts to predict maintenance needs at  
  production companies.
  
•  Development of new digital business  
  models, e.g. within the sharing  
  economy, such as rental housing, car-
  share schemes and travel booking and    
  planning.

 
 

•  Intelligent environmental monitoring,  
 
  prediction of flooding during cloudburst  
  events and management of drainage  
 
  systems.

•  Higher quality and more citizen-centered  
  care through better ressource manage-
  ment, e.g. optimising the operation of  
  public hospitals to free-up more beds.  

 

•  Quicker and better diagnosis as well as    
  more targeted treatments for diseases.

•  A more efficient tax system and better    
  possibilities to combat fraud in VAT, tax   
  and social benefits.

•  Quicker case processing and more  
  efficient administration, e.g. through  
  digital sorting of citizens’ inquires,  
  ensuring that citizens receive quicker  
 

replies. 

 
 
 
 

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

11

  12 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

2   Good starting point 

– but challenges 
as well

Denmark has a good starting point – but other countries are 
moving rapidly up the digital agenda. If Denmark is to remain 
among the most digitised countries in the world, there are a 
number of challenges to address. 

Artificial intelligence is already being used in many of the products and services that are part 
of everyday life in Denmark. E.g. in apps, search engines, image recognition, diagnosis and 
facial recognition, as well as for automation in industry. 

Several public institutions in national, regional and local government also use artificial 
intelligence, e.g. for application forms, customer service calls, invoicing, etc. The first 
experiences from using artificial intelligence for faster and better treatment are also now being 
seen in the healthcare sector.

In the private sector, there is also work on artificial intelligence in industry and transport 
as well as in the financial and insurance sectors. Several start-up businesses are using 
artificial intelligence, e.g. to automate customer services, so that customers’ problems can be 
identified more quickly. This means that customers can immediately get into contact with the 
relevant service staff, and this prevents telephone queues and waiting times.

There are considerable potentials to generate further growth and better public services 
through greater use of artificial intelligence. 

An analysis by McKinsey estimates a significant growth potential in using artificial intelligence 
as we already know it today. It is hardly possible to realise the full potential, but the analysis 
indicates that there is great potential for more growth and prosperity in the Danish economy.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

13

Denmark has a good starting point 

There is a good outset for exploiting artificial intelligence. We are already well underway, and 
Denmark is the most digitised country in Europe. Denmark has a number of elements already 
in place for work with artificial intelligence.

Danish businesses, particularly the largest businesses, already use digital technologies 
extensively, and historically Danish businesses have been extremely good at implementing 
new technologies. This means that Denmark has many global digital business successes.

The Danish public sector is one of the world’s most digitised. Denmark has a well-developed 
digital infrastructure, e.g. mobile-phone network and broadband, Digital Post (digital mailbox 
for messages and communications from public authorities) and NemID (eID solution), as well 
as high-quality public-sector data and a population with good IT skills. Denmark has also 
been good at digitising the public sector without compromising the confidence and trust that 
characterise Danish society.

Denmark has high priority on research. Denmark is among the countries in the OECD with 
the highest public investment in research and development, measured in relation to GDP, and 
there are strong research environments within artificial intelligence. The total public research 
budget for 2019 is DKK 23 billion (EUR 3.1 billion). Danish research enjoys international 
recognition, and it is high on international rankings of e.g. scientific impact. 

  14 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

Examples of artificial intelligence 

Early diagnosis of cancer at Odense University Hospital saves 
lives
The Region of Southern Denmark is working on using artificial 
intelligence to diagnose cancer more quickly. By analysing pictures of 
cancer cells, artificial intelligence can see whether a cell is cancerous 
with a high degree of certainty. Early diagnosis makes it possible to 
commence treatment faster, and thereby improve patients’ chances 
of survival. The work is part of a larger initiative in the area at Odense 
University Hospital.

Optimisation of the drinking water system in the City of Aarhus
Production, treatment and distribution of drinking water demands a 
lot of energy, which is expensive and bad for the environment. Using 
artificial intelligence, the CHAIN project being funded by Innovation 
Fund Denmark will analyse large volumes of water-consumption data 
(from sensors etc.) to minimise energy consumption on pumping water. 
This could also reduce the environmental impact of operating the water 
system. 

Baggage at Copenhagen Airport
In 2018, 30.3 million passengers went through Copenhagen Airport. 
This was an increase from 21.5 million in 2010. More passengers means 
more baggage. Therefore, since 2016, Copenhagen Airport has been 
using artificial intelligence to optimise baggage handling. Among other 
things, artificial intelligence is used to predict where staff can probably 
best empty aircraft and put cases on conveyor belts. Focus is on time 
optimisation. This has resulted in fewer queues and better passenger 
experience. 

Artificial intelligence will help beer tasting at Carlsberg
1,000 different beers are screened every day at the Carlsberg laboratory 
in Valby near Copenhagen. It is a difficult and time-demanding process. 
Therefore, researchers at the laboratory have launched a project to 
measure taste aromas before the beer is brewed. The laboratory will 
use chemical sensors to test thousands of different types of yeast. Data 
from the yeast types will be analysed using artificial intelligence, and 
then researchers will be able to predict whether a yeast has the right 
quality. In the future, it is likely that the technology could also be used to 
measure other food, air pollution, etc.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

15

Research and innovation are the foundation for future solutions to the challenges facing 
society. And they are the key to grasping the huge opportunities in artificial intelligence. 

Denmark has a flexible labour market, making it possible to adjust rapidly to changes in 
technology and to ensure that employees can change quickly between positions. Danish 
experience shows that new technology does not lead to lower employment levels, but it shifts 
employment between sectors and job functions.

Finally, in an international context, the Danish population is well-educated, almost all Danes 
use the internet on a daily basis, and there is a high degree of mutual trust and confidence. 
This means that Denmark is adaptable, and there is a good basis for implementing artificial 
intelligence.

All in all there is a good foundation for developing and using artificial intelligence.

But there are challenges as well 

A good outset is not enough. To realise the full potential in Denmark, it is necessary to take 
action in a number of areas. 

Challenges for the use of artificial intelligence in Denmark

• 

• 

• 

 Need for common guidelines and an ethical framework for artificial intelligence: 
Artificial intelligence entails a new way of making decisions. It raises a number 
of ethical issues relating to the relationship between advantages from using new 
technologies on the one hand, and consideration of people’s basic rights, due process, 
and Danish social values on the other hand.

 Need for more data in Danish for artificial intelligence: There is a demand for more 
data to train algorithms, and Danish is a small linguistic area. This constitutes a barrier 
to developing solutions that use language understanding or voice recognition in Danish, 
for example. 

 Lack of employees with the right skills: 60% of businesses report that they face 
challenges recruiting IT specialists. At European level, there is an estimated demand 
of 600,000 specialists within IT programming, and this is expected to increase in the 
years to come. 

• 

 Low level of investment: Denmark ranks lower than comparable countries with regard 
to private investment in artificial intelligence. 

  16 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

Need for a common ethical framework for artificial intelligence
Artificial intelligence entails an entirely new way of making decisions, in which computers 
and algorithms play a larger role. For example, the introduction of self-learning algorithms 
on social media creates uncertainty regarding the extent to which we can rely on 
recommendations from intelligent systems. 

This raises a number of questions regarding responsibility and security that need to be 
addressed. Furthermore, artificial intelligence raises a number of ethical issues relating to the 
relationship between, on the one hand the advantages from using new technologies, and, 
on other hand, consideration of people’s basic rights, due process, and fundamental social 
values.

Demand for more data in Danish for artificial intelligence
A prerequisite for using artificial intelligence is access to high-quality data. Incomplete 
datasets are a challenge for public and private organisations and researchers who want to 
work with artificial intelligence. 

Denmark is also a small linguistic area, and this makes it less attractive to develop artificial 
intelligence that operates in Danish and understands Danish text and speech. Developments 
are often in English, and special efforts are required to ensure that digital solutions are 
developed in Danish. 

This is a problem for businesses, public authorities and researchers. A solution to this 
challenge will improve the possibilities for all parties to develop new solutions in Danish and 
for the Danish market. 

Lack of employees with the right skills and more high-quality research
Artificial intelligence entails an increasing need for people with technical and digital skills. 
Many enterprises are facing challenges with regard to recruiting and retaining employees, 
particularly IT specialists. As many as 60% of Danish businesses were unable to find IT 
specialists in 2017 (Statistics Denmark, 2018). 

New research is helping develop new solutions and products, and therefore, high-quality 
research is crucial if Denmark is to be among the leading countries in the area. Even though 
Denmark has a strong research position in general, and strong research environments in 
artificial intelligence, there is a need to further intensify research in artificial intelligence. 

Few investments in Denmark
The US and China are clear front-runners in investment in artificial intelligence. More than 
90% of global investment and patents over the past decade have come from companies in 
the US and China. In the US, this trend is driven by the technology giants and many start-ups, 
while in China developments are to a great extent promoted by the central government. 

The position of the US and China is in part due to the size of their populations. However, 
even after taking into account the size of the population, Denmark is still below comparable 
countries such as Israel, Finland and Sweden regarding private investment and number of 
patents applied for in artificial intelligence (McKinsey 2019). 

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

17

The US and China, but also Finland and Israel have developed ambitious plans for using 
artificial intelligence, and these will increase total investment in the technology. In Denmark, 
only few businesses and public authorities have strategic priorities for artificial intelligence 
(McKinsey 2019). 

Cohesive initiatives

With this strategy, the Danish government is paving the way for Denmark to take the lead in 
responsible development and use of artificial intelligence. 

The government will implement targeted efforts within four focus areas:

Four focus areas

1.  A responsible foundation for artificial intelligence
2.  More and better data
3.  Strong competences and new knowledge
4.  Increased investment

 
 
In order to ensure that specific experience from relevant areas of society is gathered 
immediately, the government will set goals for work on artificial intelligence within specific 
priority areas. These areas are:

Priority areas

•  Healthcare
•  Energy and utilities
•  Agriculture
•  Transport

 
 
Objectives will take their outset in the areas’ own ambitions and contribute to ongoing follow-
up and work on artificial intelligence.

The focus areas as well as the priority areas are based on the government’s other work on 
future-proofing Denmark. For example, the government has started several initiatives to help 
establish a better framework for development and use of artificial intelligence in Denmark.

  18 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

Disruptionrådet (a partnership for Denmark’s future) has discussed the impacts on the labour 
market and the changes artificial intelligence will entail for many jobs, and it has spotlighted 
data ethics as a competition parameter. Moreover, several initiatives have been launched to 
strengthen education and training, and to attract talent.

The Strategy for Denmark’s Digital Growth and the Digital Hub Denmark initiative have put 
focus on the opportunities for businesses in big data and artificial intelligence. 

Furthermore, the framework for using artificial intelligence was further strengthened with 
initiatives for a good digital infrastructure, including a modernised telecommunications 
agreement and a 5G action plan.

With the World-class digital services in the Cohesion in the Public Sector Reform, the 
government has paved the way for how the public sector is to provide better and more 
cohesive digital services for citizens, including through increased use and dissemination of new 
technology. The Reform will ensure that people have access to services based on their needs 
by accelerating e-government efforts and contributing to better and more cohesive welfare.

The research and innovation policy strategy Denmark – ready for the future and 
implementation of the research reserve for 2019 will strengthen research in digital 
technologies. There are also efforts to enhance digital competences, including the STEM 
action plan (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics), Teknologipagten, and trials in 
primary and lower secondary schools to promote understanding of technology.

The initiatives mean that Denmark has a good foundation to exploit artificial intelligence, with 
good research, good framework conditions and a digital public sector.

The aim of the strategy is also to support Danish cooperation on artificial intelligence with 
other countries, in particular in the EU, the OECD, the Council of Europe and the Nordic 
Council of Ministers. If Denmark is are to succeed in promoting responsible development and 
use of artificial intelligence, not only in Denmark, but also internationally, coordinated efforts at 
European level are vital.

International cooperation on artificial intelligence

The EU action plan for artificial intelligence Made in Europe
The European Commission has established a common European framework for 
collaboration on artificial intelligence. In the upcoming budget period, the EU will invest 
in European development of artificial intelligence through Horizon Europe and the Digital 
Europe Programme. This provides opportunities for Danish businesses, authorities and 
research communities.

Nordic-Baltic cooperation on artificial intelligence
With their declaration AI in the Nordic-Baltic region, the Nordic and Baltic countries 
have agreed to cooperate on artificial intelligence to secure digital skills, access to data 
based on common standards, ethical guidelines for artificial intelligence, and to promote 
development of the technology in Europe.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

19

This strategy is a first step

The strategy contains 24 initiatives. The government has earmarked DKK 60 million (EUR 9.2 
million) for 2019-2027.

This is a supplement to the DKK 295 million (EUR 45.4 million) allocated in the Finance Act 
2019 from the research reserve for research into new technological possibilities and digital 
technologies and for a national centre for research into digital technologies. 

The government has also proposed a new investment fund to expedite the dissemination of 
digital welfare solutions. Together with initiatives already launched, the investment fund will 
have a total investment budget of DKK 410 million (EUR 63.1 million) for 2018-2022.

This strategy sets a direction, and a number of specific projects will be launched to help 
Denmark reap the full benefits of the opportunities artificial intelligence will provide over the 
years to come. However, this is only one step on the way. Sustained efforts are required if the 
vision is to be realised. New challenges will arise, and it will be necessary to adjust initiatives 
along the way. And there will be needs for new initiatives as the technology develops. 

Therefore, the government will monitor developments and evaluate the strategy annually. 
The government will also regularly receive input from professional networks, decision makers, 
researchers, political stakeholders, etc. 

With a strong focus on ethics, better use of data, and the importance of competences and 
research, the government is also sowing the seeds for Denmark to play a role in developing 
artificial intelligence in the long term. Several of the research projects currently being launched 
around the world and in Denmark, are aiming to break new scientific ground, the significance 
of which could take 50 years to become apparent. With Denmark’s strong research 
communities, there is a good basis to influence developments in the very long term.

  20 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

Central initiatives in the strategy

Principles for responsible development and
use of arti(cid:12)cial intelligence
The development and use of arti(cid:13)cial intelligence. These principles will be 
supplemented with initiatives to strengthen cyber security, creating legal 
clarity as well as ensuring responsible and transparent use of arti(cid:13)cial 
intelligence in the public sector.

Common Danish language resource
A common Danish language resource will be established to support and 
accelerate the development of language-technology solutions in Danish.
The language resource will be freely available, enabling suppliers to build
on existing knowledge to create new solutions within voice recognition
and language understanding to bene(cid:13)t citizens, authorities and businesses.

More open public-sector data for arti(cid:12)cial intelligence
In collaboration with businesses and research communities, the government 
will identify (cid:13)ve public-sector datasets during 2020 and 2021, which can be 
made available for businesses, researchers and public authorities and 
contribute to the development of arti(cid:13)cial intelligence. The datasets will not 
contain personal data, but rather environment and climate data from the 
transportation sector.  

Signature projects in the public sector
There is a lack of experience in use of arti(cid:13)cial intelligence in the public sector. 
Therefore, the government will launch a number of signature projects within 
health, the social and employment areas, and cross-sector case processing. 

Stronger investment in Danish businesses
It is proposed to launch a pilot project in the form of an investment pool
of DKK 20 million (EUR 3.1 million) over four years targeting at companies 
with a business model based on arti(cid:13)cial intelligence. The prerequisite for 
this is a 50 percent (cid:13)nancing from the private sector amounting to a total 
investment pool of DKK 40 million (EUR 6.2 million). The fund will be 
managed by the Danish Growth Fund.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

21

Focus areas

I   A responsible 

foundation for 
artificial intelligence 

There must be a responsible ethical and legal framework for 
the use of artificial intelligence.

Artificial intelligence holds a great potential for growth, innovation and better public services. 
However, increased use of artificial intelligence also raises a number of ethical and legal 
issues in both the public and private sectors. 

Many of these issues are well-known from previous work with data. Others are new issues 
regarding the responsibility for decision-making, transparency and discrimination, for example.

Stronger confidence 
Denmark has performed well when it comes to digitisation, both in the public and private 
sectors. Denmark has also managed to preserve high confidence in the public sector from 
both individuals and the business community. A total of 83% of Danes have confidence in the 
management of personal information by the public authorities (Statistics Denmark, 2017). In 
World-class digital services, the government has set a goal to increase this to 90% before 2024.

Realising this goal and the potentials in artificial intelligence requires a common ethical basis 
for development and use of artificial intelligence. This will also support confidence in work by 
both the public sector and by businesses on data and new technologies.

Therefore, the government has set up six ethical principles, and these will form the framework 
for future development and use of artificial intelligence. A number of initiatives to promote a 
strong focus on data ethics will also be launched.

Development and use of artificial intelligence must be within the relevant legislative 
framework. Use of personal data should always respect the basic principles in the General 
Data Protection Regulation.

The legislative framework is in the General Data Protection Regulation, administrative 
law, etc., and these regulate work with artificial intelligence, through among other things 

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

25

requirements in connection with processing personal data. In the future, the use of technology 
is expected to raise new legal and ethical issues.

Therefore, the government will monitor developments closely and regularly assess the need 
for guidelines on interpretation of the current legal framework as well as the need for new 
legislation, as more experience is obtained with the technology and its possibilities.

The government’s initiatives should also be considered in the context of international 
developments in the area, where there is an increasing interest to ethical use of artificial 
intelligence both at the EU level and globally. 

By taking the lead, Denmark can influence developments, and help ensure that the public 
and private sectors focus on responsibility when using artificial intelligence. This will improve 
the conditions for providing services closer to citizens based on their needs, and it will give 
businesses a competitive edge.

Security is paramount
Security is also crucial to ensure responsible development and use of artificial intelligence. 
Individuals, businesses and employees must be confident that data and algorithms have 
been safeguarded against manipulation and attack, and that the results produced by artificial 
intelligence are reliable. 

On the one hand, the spread of artificial intelligence entails a risk of exacerbating existing 
cyber threats and creating entirely new risks. At worst, technologies using artificial intelligence 
could be influenced for malicious use. For example, artificial intelligence could be used to 
automate cyber attacks on critical infrastructure and on Danish companies. 

On the other hand, artificial intelligence will provide opportunities for Danish businesses 
to develop advanced IT security solutions that exploit the potentials in the technology. For 
example, the new technology makes it possible for systems to automatically reveal unknown 
viruses and attempts at incursion never seen before. 

Case: Intelligent cyber security

The American company IBM has launched the QRadar program. Using artificial 
intelligence, QRadar can examine billions of pieces of information in a short period of time 
and look for signs that a network or system has been compromised by malicious players. 
In this way the program can help IT specialists find breaches of security that would be 
hard for a human to detect.

 
 
New IT security solutions based on artificial intelligence can potentially create new export 
opportunities and increase IT security. However, wherever these new IT security solutions 
are used, they will also entail potential risks if they are manipulated.

  26 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

The government will ensure that data, for example personal data on citizens, continues to be 
managed appropriately, and that artificial intelligence, its algorithms and results are trustworthy. 

Government initiatives

The government will implement the following initiatives:

1.  Ethical principles for artificial intelligence 
2.  Establishment of the Data Ethics Council
3.  Security and artificial intelligence 
4.  Legal clarity on development and use of artificial intelligence 
5.  Transparent use of algorithms by the public sector
6.  Ethically responsible and sustainable use of data by the business community 
7.  Danish imprint on standards for artificial intelligence

The initiatives supplement existing efforts: 

•  World-class digital services
•  Danish Cyber and Information Security Strategy, including strategies for sectors critical 

for society.

•  Strategy for Denmark’s Digital Growth 

Initiative 1.1: Ethical principles for artificial intelligence

Work on artificial intelligence raises a number of ethical issues. For example, is it possible to 
secure the basic rights of citizens, due process and fundamental societal values when using 
artificial intelligence?

Therefore, the government has prepared six ethical principles to set a common framework for 
development and use of artificial intelligence. A common ethical framework is a precondition 
for maintaining the high level of confidence and trust in Denmark. 

The ethical principles aim at authorities, businesses, research institutions and others working 
with artificial intelligence. The principles reflect Danish values and have been prepared on the 
basis of the recommendations from the Expert Group on Data Ethics set up under the Danish 
Disruption Council, and the draft EU ethical principles and guidelines for artificial intelligence.

The government will regularly follow up on the principles, among other things after discussions 
with the Data Ethics Council. The follow-up will take into account the differences between the 
public and private sectors. The public sector is subject to the Danish Public Administration Act 
and the Danish Access to Public Administration Files Act, for example, whereas businesses 
may need to protect trade secrets.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

27

Six principles for artificial intelligence

1.  Self-determination
2.  Dignity
3.  Responsibility
4.  Explainability 
5.  Equality and justice 
6.  Development 

 
 

1.  Self-determination
People’s autonomy should have priority in development and use of artificial intelligence. Like 
today, people should be able to make informed and independent decisions without artificial 
intelligence removing their self-determination.

2.  Dignity
Human dignity should be respected in development and use of artificial intelligence. 
Artificial intelligence should not cause injury, it should support due process and it should not 
unjustifiably place people in a worse position. Artificial intelligence should respect democracy 
and democratic processes, and it should not be used to infringe fundamental human rights.

3.  Responsibility 
All levels should be responsible for the consequences of their development and use of 
artificial intelligence, i.e. developers, cooperation partners, users, authorities, businesses, etc. 
In decisions and decision-support based on artificial intelligence, it should be possible to place 
responsibility on human beings. 

4.  Explainability
Explainability means that you can describe, control and restore data, underlying logics and 
consequences of the use of artificial intelligence, e.g. by being able to trace and explain 
decisions and decision support. Explainability is not the same as full transparency of 
algorithms, as there are business interests in the private sector, for example. However, the 
public authorities have a special responsibility to ensure openness and transparency in the 
use of algorithms.

5.  Equality and justice 
Artificial intelligence should not reproduce prejudices that marginalise specific population 
groups. There will be active work to prevent unwanted bias and promote designs that avoid 
classification discriminating on ethnicity, sexuality and gender, for example. Demographic and 
professional diversity should be guiding parameters in working with artificial intelligence. 

  28 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

6.  Development
Artificial intelligence can help forge great progress for society. Technical and organisational 
solutions should be developed that support ethically responsible development and use of 
artificial intelligence in order to achieve the greatest possible progress for society, e.g. by 
contributing to better public-sector services and to growth in the business community.

Initiative 1.2: Establishment of the Data Ethics Council

The government will establish the Data Ethics Council in 2019 to make recommendations and 
support broad public debate on issues regarding data ethics, including artificial intelligence. 
The council will monitor technological development and help to ensure that ethical issues 
are taken up so that the many advantages of using data can be supported in an ethically 
appropriate manner. 

The council will discuss how to ensure that technological opportunities are exploited such that 
they serve the shared values of Danish society in the future. 

Initiative 1.3: Security and artificial intelligence

Solutions based on artificial intelligence must be secure and tested to confirm they can 
withstand systematic attacks. The government will therefore launch an initiative to support 
secure development and deployment of artificial intelligence. This will ensure that confidence 
in digital solutions is preserved, and this is an important precondition for realising the societal 
benefits of more digitisation and wider use of artificial intelligence.

The initiative will analyse the security risks that may arise for authorities and businesses 
from increased use of artificial intelligence. Existing risks and threats will be exacerbated, 
for example if cyber attacks are automated, or intelligent malware is used. At the same time, 
entirely new and previously unknown risks will arise, e.g. if the data basis for smart solutions 
is compromised. 

This initiative will also involve preparation of guidelines to assign specific initiatives to 
strengthen work by the authorities and businesses on IT security and data protection. For 
example, there will be specific examples of contractual requirements concerning security that 
the authorities can impose on suppliers of artificial intelligence. 

Another part of the initiative will involve implementing initiatives to enhance the development 
and implementation in Danish businesses of IT security solutions based on artificial 
intelligence. 

Together, these activities will forge a safe and secure framework for introducing artificial 
intelligence in the public sector and in businesses. The initiative will also help ensure that the 
technology can be used proactively in cyber security in Denmark.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

29

The initiative should be seen in the context of the government’s 2018 National strategy for 
cyber and information security. In the years to come, DKK 1.5 billion (EUR 200 million) will be 
invested in work by the Ministry of Defence on cyber and information security. Furthermore, 
six targeted strategies have been drawn up for work in the most critical sectors on cyber and 
information security in accordance with the principle of sector responsibility.

Initiative 1.4: Legal clarity on development and use of 
artificial intelligence
Greater use of artificial intelligence raises a number of legal issues. For example, who is 
responsible if a self-driving car is involved in an accident? Is it the ‘driver’ because they should 
have intervened? Is it the manufacturer or developers of the self-learning intelligent system? 
Driverless cars have not yet been developed commercially, but the introduction of artificial 
intelligence is already showing that there is a number of questions about legal responsibility to 
be addressed in more detail.

Therefore, the government will set up an inter-ministerial working group to examine whether 
the issues in using artificial intelligence can be managed within the existing legislative 
framework. The working group will identify the need for guidelines on the regulations that 
apply in relation to the use of artificial intelligence, and there may be a need to launch 
legislative initiatives at national or EU level. The work of the working group could also form a 
basis for dialogue with the European Commission on any need for regulatory measures.

Initiative 1.5: Transparent use of artificial intelligence 
by the public sector
Citizens and businesses must have confidence in artificial intelligence whenever it is used 
by the public authorities, so that artificial intelligence does not undermine public confidence 
in the public authorities generally. This applies in particular when the authorities use artificial 
intelligence to support decision-making.

On the basis of the ethical principles, the government will ensure that common public-
sector methods and guidelines are drawn up which support the statutory requirements for 
transparency etc. As part of this work, a pilot project will be initiated to develop and test 
methods for how public authorities actually ensure the statutory requirements for reasonable, 
responsible and transparent use of artificial intelligence as a basis for making decisions. 

  30 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

Initiative 1.6: Ethically responsible and sustainable use 
of data by the business community

As a follow-up to the recommendations from the government’s expert group on data ethics, 
the government will launch a number of initiatives targeted at the business community. The 
expert group has looked at how work by businesses on responsible use of data can be 
supported so that it becomes a competitive advantage for Danish and European businesses. 

Among other things, the government will prepare a toolbox with specific tools such as 
guidelines to help enterprises in their routine work with data responsibility. The government 
will also present a proposed legislative amendment to the Danish Financial Statements Act so 
that the largest Danish companies have to report on their data-ethics policy.

Furthermore, a data-ethics label will be introduced for businesses that comply with the ethical 
principles for data utilisation, to display on their website, for example. This will make it easier 
for consumers to navigate between businesses, services and products and choose the data-
ethically responsible alternative. 

Preparation of the toolbox, amendments to the Financial Statements Act and the data-ethics 
label will be carried out on the basis of ethical principles.

Finally, the government will make active efforts for relevant initiatives to be introduced in the 
EU in order to ensure equal competitive conditions for Danish businesses in the EU single 
market.

Initiative 1.7: Danish imprint on standards for artificial 
intelligence

The international race is on to influence the development of new standards within artificial 
intelligence. As far as possible, the government wants the forthcoming international standards 
to be prepared on the basis of the needs of Danish businesses, as the standards will form the 
basis for future regulation of artificial intelligence at European and international levels.

In order to gain real influence on European standardisation work, the government has 
successfully acquired responsibility for the secretariat of the upcoming European focus group 
that is to identify the needs for standardisation within artificial intelligence. With the secretariat 
in Denmark, Danish businesses will be able to make a strong imprint on the work. 

In parallel, the government will initiate work to develop national technical specifications based 
on the specific needs of Danish businesses. This work will take its outset in the six ethical 
principles for artificial intelligence.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

31

II  More and better data 

 

Data is the prerequisite for artificial intelligence. The 
Danish point of departure is good, but we can go even 
further.

Data is the raw material of the future and it is an essential prerequisite for the use of artificial 
intelligence. The quality and volume of data determines how far it is possible to go with 
artificial intelligence. 

Businesses, public authorities and researchers need large datasets that can be linked 
across areas to develop new solutions with artificial intelligence. For example, data on water 
consumption can be used by waterworks to develop solutions to provide better and more 
stable water supply by finding and predicting leaks in pipes. Data on consumers’ online 
purchases and locations can help shops predict when consumers will buy a given product.

Municipalities can collect and analyse data on education and age to develop targeted 
employment measures for the individual. In the healthcare area, data on sickness and hospital 
discharges could form the basis for solutions to ensure better and more cohesive treatment for 
patients. This is good; for the individual citizen, for businesses and for the economy. 

Good access to public data
Several initiatives have already secured better access to public data. These include the Basic 
Data Program, which, since 2012, has made available data on real property, addresses, roads 
and areas, water and climate, geography, persons and businesses. 

And this work is continuing. In 2018, the government decided to release weather and climate 
data from the Danish Meteorological Institute. Up to 2023, a large number of datasets on 
weather observations and forecasts will be made freely available for everyone. This will 
make it possible for electricity plants, for example, to develop solutions that adjust production 
of electricity to wind and weather conditions, or for businesses to develop new apps for 
consumers. With its Health Data Programme, the government has also earmarked DKK 250 
mill. to ensure better data quality and data bases and to strengthen cross-sectoral cooperation 
on health data.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

33

Through membership of the European Space Agency (ESA) and the two EU space 
programmes, Copernicus and Galileo, Denmark is also helping to gather and process large 
amounts of weather, environment and climate data. Most of this data is freely available for 
citizens, businesses, public authorities and researchers. 

If Danish businesses are to exploit the potential in artificial intelligence and strengthen 
Denmark’s position as a digital frontrunner, it is vital that they have access to data.

Uncertainty about the rules should not constitute a barrier to using and sharing data as a 
source of innovation and growth in the Danish business community. Therefore, as part of the 
Strategy for Denmark’s Digital Growth, the government has prepared guidance materials for 
businesses about the rules for ownership and rights in connection with the use and sharing of 
data. This will ensure clarity about the rules for businesses and their use of data.

As a result hereof, the Danish point of departure is very good, but we can go even further. 
There is still low use of data, e.g. big data by Danish businesses, and several public datasets 
are still not available for researchers and businesses. Moreover, there is still too little use of 
the datasets that are available to develop new, smart solutions.

Better opportunities for Danish solutions 
With this National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence, the Danish government is launching 
a range of initiatives to release more and better Danish non-personal data, and to make 
businesses’ frameworks for the use of data even better. However, more use of data also 
places more demands on businesses and the public sector. The government will ensure that 
citizens are involved when data is made available. Citizens should be no doubt that both 
businesses and the public authorities use and store data responsibly.

Among other things, this requires that the public authorities have access to good and secure 
solutions to store data. The government will launch an initiative to give government authorities 
access to secure environments for data storage, as well as access to develop and test 
artificial intelligence by examining access to cloud technology. Furthermore, there will be work 
to give businesses better access to closed, secure environments, where this is permitted by 
legislation.

Many of the technological solutions we know today have been developed in English, and the 
goal has to be, that solutions developed and used in Danish are of equal quality. In line with 
increasing internationalisation of society, it is important to ensure that the Danish language 
remains strong if individuals and businesses are to have access to up-to-date digital solutions 
in Danish.

Therefore, the government will enhance opportunities to develop solutions in Danish by 
establishing a freely available Danish language resource. The language resource will enable 
businesses, researchers and public authorities to securely and efficiently develop solutions 
using voice recognition and language understanding in Danish. 

Finally, the government will also focus on how the EU can establish better access to public-
sector data across countries and how sharing data between businesses can be strengthened. 

  34 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

Government initiatives

The government will implement the following initiatives:

1.  Common Danish language resource
2.  Better access to public-sector data
3.  More data in the cloud for artificial intelligence 
4.  Improved access to data outside Denmark for Danish businesses and researchers

The initiatives supplement existing efforts: 

•  The Basic Data Programme
•  Business data from Virk.dk
•  Clear guidelines for businesses and their use of data.
•  Free access to weather, climate and marine data from the Danish Meteorological 

Institute

•  The Health Data Programme
•  Participation in European cooperation on space data, particularly on the weather, 

environment and climate

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

35

Initiative 2.1: Common Danish language resource 

Danish is a small language area, and this means that the majority of language-technology 
solutions do not work optimally in Danish. This is a challenge, because language technology 
is often an integral part of the digital solutions we use every day. Language-technology 
solutions are used to speak with virtual assistants, e.g. to read out bus stops over speakers in 
busses and to translate between languages. 

In step with the development of ever more advanced digital solutions in English that people can 
interact with, there is a risk that interaction could be increasingly in English rather than Danish. If 
citizens and Danish businesses are to continue to have access and possibilities to develop good 
solutions in Danish, Danish must continue as a strong language in international competition. 

Language technology in the form of voice recognition and language understanding is a pivotal 
precondition for the development and use of artificial intelligence in Danish. It enables us to 
analyse, recognise and reproduce language within reading aloud and translation for example. 
Sweden, Norway and other countries comparable to Denmark are also prioritising and 
investing in the area. 

For example, language technology can be used to help people with sight disabilities or people who 
find it difficult to read and write by reading texts aloud or record messages. Language technology 
also helps physicians to make diagnoses quicker because physicians can dictate observations 
instead writing them down later. This saves time that can be spent with patients instead.

A common Danish 
language resource
A structured collection of digital 
datasets (sound, text and words) 

freely available to everyone

The spoken language

Word and term bases

Collection of sound (cid:6)les

(voice and dialogue 
recordings), dialects, 
transcribed sound (cid:6)les

The written language

Collection of texts, text 

corpora, grammar, 

annotated text

Dictionaries (words, 

word classes), 

terminology banks 
(specialist term bases)

  36 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

Today, a significant barrier to developing Danish language technology is that developing 
digital language resources requires large investments for individual players. This is a problem 
for Danish competitiveness, knowledge-development, and future digitisation of Denmark – in 
businesses, in the public sector and in research.

An open and shared language resource will provide new research opportunities and 
strengthen development of solutions in the public and private sectors within artificial 
intelligence. For example, solutions will be developed to help companies transcribe phone 
calls so that customer enquiries can be answered faster. It will also be easier for the public 
authorities to develop solutions for citizen service centres, for example high-quality chatbots to 
help citizens more quickly and easily. 

Therefore, in collaboration with both private and public players, the government will start 
development of a language resource that will be freely available for everyone. This will ensure 
that businesses, researchers and public authorities have access to a high-quality shared 
language resource.

The language resource will build on existing initiatives in the public sector and private sector 
as well as in research communities. This will be in collaboration between public and private 
players.

Initiative 2.2: Better access to public-sector data

Denmark has public-sector data of high quality. We need to exploit this and turn it into an 
international competitive advantage. 

Therefore, in collaboration with the business community and research communities, the 
government will identify five public-sector datasets during 2020 and 2021, which can be made 
accessible for businesses, researchers and public authorities as non-personal data, thereby 
contributing to the development of artificial intelligence. 

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

37

Examples of datasets which can be released

Location data in the 
transport area which 
can relieve congestion 
and help urban 
planning by analysing 
tra(cid:11)c patterns. 

Language data
from di(cid:7)erent 
sources where text 
and sound data can 
be used to develop 
chatbots or other 
services that can 
improve both public 
and private services. 

Image and statistical 
data in the 
environmental area 
which can support 
the development of 
new green solutions, 
for example by 
analysing weather 
and climate data. 

 
 
 
In parallel, the government will ensure that, through test projects, businesses and researchers 
are given the opportunity to test and develop new innovative solutions using public-sector 
data. 

The initiative’s work on access to public-sector data will contribute to resolving societal issues 
like climate challenges and congestion. This work will also inspire more innovation, new 
thinking and use of artificial intelligence across businesses, research communities and public 
authorities.

This National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence will launch initiatives to ensure that more 
non-personal public-sector data is made available. However, there is also a need for more 
strategic initiatives, so that, in the longer term, Denmark can fully exploit the potentials of 
Denmark’s good public-sector datasets. Therefore, with World-class digital services, the 
government has taken initiative to prepare a strategy for data in the public sector. 

This strategy will help the public sector become better at using data to provide citizens and 
businesses with more cohesive and targeted services. As part of this, public authorities will 
work together to create a cohesive high-quality data basis that provides a digital foundation for 
good, correct and efficient services for citizens and businesses.

The strategy will set a clear framework for the use of public-sector data to ensure and 
increase public confidence in public-sector work with data.

  38 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

Initiative 2.3: More data in the cloud for artificial 
intelligence 
It should be easier for public authorities to develop and work with artificial intelligence. 
Cloud technologies can be a precondition for working with artificial intelligence, as these 
technologies give cheap access to massive computational power and storage capacity. At the 
same time, cloud technologies make it easier to work together across datasets. In future, the 
government therefore wants to provide authorities with a basis for taking an active position on 
whether data should be stored in the cloud.

The government will launch a number of activities addressing the challenges and opportunities 
of using cloud solutions. 

What are cloud technologies?

Cloud technologies is an overall term for solutions for servers and applications, that can 
be accessed via the internet. Cloud technologies are advantageous, as they can quickly 
be scaled up and down according to user needs. By storing data in cloud solutions, 
authorities can buy access to the (processing) power necessary to work with artificial 
intelligence.

 
 
An analysis will be conducted of how to make it easier for authorities to start using secure 
cloud solutions. Guidelines will also be prepared for public authorities that are to decide on the 
use of cloud solutions. 

Moreover, the government will promote central government use of cloud technologies by 
establishing secure cloud environments for government authorities linked to Statens IT. Cloud 
environments will be offered to public authorities wanting to explore how they can quickly get 
started with work on artificial intelligence or data analysis.

Initiative 2.4: Improved access to data outside Denmark 
for Danish businesses and researchers
It should be easier for Danish businesses to access data abroad, particularly in the EU. At 
the European level, efforts are being made to ensure better access to data, among others, for 
businesses and research communities. 

New European frameworks for making available public-sector data create an opportunity for 
Danish businesses to deploy data-based business models across the whole of the EU. The 
government will work to ensure that the data that EU Member States are obligated to make 
available is of value to Danish businesses, authorities and researchers.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

39

Towards a common European data space

The EU Coordinated Plan on Artificial Intelligence states that more data from public 
authorities and businesses should be shared and made available across national borders. 
The first step towards a common European data space is the PSI Directive, which will 
ensure that all EU Member States make certain spatial data, environmental data, weather 
data etc. freely available at the European level. The next step is to review the European 
frameworks for re-use of business data and the ongoing trials of data pools. In the 
research area, efforts are being made to improve frameworks for sharing and re-using 
research data across Europe through the European Open Science Cloud, where Denmark 
is participating in governing bodies. The initiative entails harmonisation of access 
principles, infrastructure and data management.

 
 
The European Commission will also carry out a review of the European framework for re-use 
of business data, including copyrights, display of data, as well as guidelines for data transfer 
in connection with changes of service providers. Denmark will influence this work to improve 
the possibilities of access to data, whilst complying with the principles of responsible use of 
artificial intelligence. This will benefit the competitiveness of businesses. 

Finally, Denmark will work to ensure a good framework for sharing data between businesses 
in the annual review of the EU Plan on Artificial Intelligence. This applies in particular to the 
European Commission’s proposal on data pools, which the government will monitor closely.

  40 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

III   Strong 

competences and 
new knowledge

Digital competences are key to using artificial  
intelligence.

In order to make the best use of the opportunities offered by artificial intelligence, businesses 
and the public sector must have access to employees with the right competences.

This applies in particular to IT specialists with experience in developing and using artificial 
intelligence. IT specialists typically use their technical expertise – for example computer 
scientists develop algorithms. However, this also applies to employees with more general 
digital and technical competences, who can apply the technology in their day-to-day work. For 
example, an administrative employee who has to understand and act on recommendations 
from an IT system. 

Technology only adds value in its interaction with people. This means that artificial intelligence 
should not replace people, but instead be used by people to improve conditions for individuals 
and for society. Therefore, there is a need to improve digital competences and digital 
understanding in the entire population, so that we can benefit from the possibilities of the 
technology. 

This means that it is important to train more young people with the right competences to use 
artificial intelligence. However, it is also important to upgrade the skills and qualifications 
of existing employees, so that they can carry out their tasks in new ways and with new 
technological devices. 

Today, IT specialists constitute just over 4% of the employed in Denmark. In a survey of 
Danish businesses, 60% of businesses that have tried to recruit IT specialists state that they 
are facing challenges with regard to recruiting IT specialists (Statistics Denmark, 2018). At the 
European level, there is an estimated demand of 600,000 IT programming specialists. This 
demand is expected to increase in the years to come (EU, 2018).

On some parameters, things are going in the right direction. The intake to higher education 
IT programmes in Denmark rose by 50% in the period 2009-2018 (coordinated enrolment 
system, 2018). Denmark ranks fourth out of 35 OECD countries in terms of training young 

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

43

individuals within information and communications technology (OECD, 2016). However, focus 
must be maintained for Denmark to become a frontrunner in development and use of artificial 
intelligence. 

Case: New education programmes on artificial intelligence

New programmes on artificial intelligence are constantly being set up. For example, in 
2018 the Technical University of Denmark set up a new BSc programme on artificial 
intelligence and data. In 2019, the University of Copenhagen will set up a new BSc 
programme on machine learning and data science. On Danish artificial intelligence 
programmes, students not only work with large amounts of data and algorithms, they 
also discuss the ethical choices that will often be part of programming and designing 
algorithms.

 
 
Strong research culture
There is a global race within research in artificial intelligence, in which countries such as the 
US and China are investing massively in research in the technology. 

Even though Denmark does not measure up to large nations in terms of scope of research, 
Denmark stands strong as a research nation with good research environments within artificial 
intelligence. And Denmark is proportionally among the largest global investors in public 
research. 

In order to help support development of artificial intelligence, Denmark must strengthen 
research efforts within the area. Denmark must ensure that future research talents have good 
conditions to provide useful technological solutions for individual, businesses and the public 
sector. This will fulfil the potentials offered by artificial intelligence in the short term. But it 
will also pave the way for scientific ground-breaking results, contributing to the fundamental 
development of the technology in the long term. 

Enhanced research efforts will also help ensure that Denmark can influence the development 
of artificial intelligence according to Danish values. Strong focus on responsibility and ethics is 
already a consistent feature in Danish research into the technology. 

As a small country, Denmark cannot build the necessary infrastructure on its own. On the 
other hand, the EU will be investing massively in building research infrastructure within 
artificial intelligence in the years to come. In this context, Denmark needs to ensure easy 
access to the most recent technological facilities for Danish researchers and businesses. 
For example, in 2018 Denmark joined the European High Performance Computing Joint 
Undertaking (EuroHPC), which is to develop a future European supercomputer that can 
process huge amounts of data for use in climate-change and cyber-security research, for 
example.

  44 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

The government will act on several fronts, which together will establish a solid basis for 
developing and using artificial intelligence. A number of initiatives will support strong research 
efforts while at the same time strengthening employee competences and understanding of 
technology to maximise Denmark’s new technological possibilities in the long term. 

A solid foundation 
The government has already launched several initiatives to improve the frameworks for 
strengthened digital competences and understanding of technology as well as research into 
new technologies, including artificial intelligence. The new initiatives should therefore be seen 
in the context of existing initiatives. 

Teknologipagten (Technology Pact) and the future STEM action plan will raise the skills of 
the workforce, and it is important that more young individuals are encouraged to take digital 
and technological education programmes focusing on artificial intelligence, for example. In 
Teknologipagten, the government has set a goal that in 10 years Denmark will have about 
10,000 more people with higher or vocational qualifications within the so-called STEM 
disciplines.

The government has launched a talent programme to provide the most talented and motivated 
students with better opportunities and greater challenges, so they become even more skilled 
within their fields. The government will set aside a pool of DKK 190 million (EUR 25 million) to 
cover all technical fields, including new technologies like artificial intelligence. 

As part of the government’s Strategy for Denmark’s Digital Growth, a trial programme has 
been launched to enhance understanding of technology in compulsory programmes at 
municipal primary and lower-secondary schools. The objective is to ensure that all students 
learn to reflect critically about technology and shape it rather than use it. 

As part of the follow-up to recommendations from the Expert Committee on Quality in 
Higher Education in Denmark, in the coming years the universities will work on integrating 
into programmes competences such as coding, data analysis and understanding of 
technology. The aim is that students be trained in reflecting on, and being critical about, 
ethical and societal consequences of technological developments and that they gain a better 
understanding of the digital technologies and possibilities of individual education programmes.

Based on the work by Disruptionrådet (Disruption Council), a number of projects will also 
be carried out to improve the digital competences of teachers on relevant higher education 
programmes. This will put teachers in a better position to use digital solutions and to link 
understanding of technology with their academic core competences as well as strengthen their 
understanding of, and critical position on, digital technologies such as artificial intelligence.

Denmark currently has innovation centres in eight cities to build a bridge to some of the 
strongest partners within research, higher education and business development in some of 
the world’s leading innovation communities. The centres also support collaboration on artificial 
intelligence between Danish and international researchers and businesses. For example, 
the innovation centre in Silicon Valley and the Danish Academy of Technical Sciences 
together offer an “Applied AI Academy”; an exclusive and intensive training course for Danish 
technology leaders from knowledge institutions, public authorities and businesses. 

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

45

Moreover, partnership agreements with American elite universities have been entered into 
through the innovation centres in Silicon Valley, which each year offer up to 20 Danish PhD 
students and researchers within, for example artificial intelligence, a place at Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT) and at the Center for Information Technology Research in the 
Interest of Society (CITRIS) at UC Berkeley.

In the 2019 State Budget, the Danish government has allocated DKK 215 million (EUR 27 
million) to Innovation Fund Denmark to conduct research into new technological possibilities. 
The Budget also allocates DKK 80 million (EUR 10.7 million) to the Independent Research 
Fund Denmark to conduct research into digital technologies, including artificial intelligence. In 
the years ahead, the government will continue to prioritize research into digital technologies, 
such as artificial intelligence. 

As part of the funds allocated for research into new technological possibilities under 
Innovation Fund Denmark, DKK 100 million (EUR 13.4 million) will be earmarked for a 
national centre for research into new digital technologies. The centre will help build the talent 
pool in the area, so that, in the future, Denmark will have an even better basis for influencing 
the development of artificial intelligence. 

Furthermore, Innovation Fund Denmark’s implementation of funding for strategic and 
challenge-driven research will also be based on the FORSK2025 catalogue. One of the four 
overall themes in the catalogue – New technological possibilities – provides a natural focus on 
new technology and digitisation in research investments.

Case: Artificial intelligence provides better food safety

Today, X-ray inspection requires unique solutions for each product to be tested. For 
example, one solution is used to find out whether a potato is rotten, whereas another 
solution is used to find out whether cold cuts have been contaminated with metal chips. 
Innovation Fund Denmark is supporting a project to develop quality control of food, for 
example, using X-ray inspection. The aim of using artificial intelligence is to eliminate the 
need to develop unique software solutions for each individual product, allowing the system 
automatically to learn to distinguish between good and faulty products.

 
 
Artificial intelligence requires access to large amounts of data. Full exploitation of the 
possibilities in the development of data requires a supportive digital research infrastructure 
that can handle transport, processing and storage of data. A strategy for national collaboration 
on digital research infrastructure has therefore been prepared to provide the best possible 
digital tools.

  46 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

Government initiatives

Artificial intelligence places new demands on the labour market and competences. 
Consequently, the government has already launched a number of initiatives in the area. The 
government will continue its work and at the same time implement further initiatives focusing 
particularly on artificial intelligence.

The government will implement the following initiatives:

1.  Dialogue with research funding foundations on artificial intelligence.
2.  Stronger digital competences in central government
3.  Strong Danish participation in the EU Framework Programme for Research and 

Innovation

4.  Stronger digital competences through adult, continuing and further education

The initiatives supplement existing efforts: 

•  Teknologipagten (Technology Pact): More young people on technological and digital 

education programmes 

•  Talent programme for the most talented students on higher education programmes
• 

Improved digital competences and better understanding of technology in primary and 
lower secondary schools and in higher education

•  Priority of more funding for research into new technological possibilities and digital 

technologies

•  National centre for research into new digital technologies
•  Stronger digital research infrastructure 

Initiative 3.1: Dialogue with public research funding 
foundations on artificial intelligence
The public research funding foundations implement funding for research projects in open 
competition on the basis of a professional assessment of quality and relevance. Some 
research communities are, however, experiencing that research into artificial intelligence 
and data science does not always fit into the programmes and application categories of the 
foundations. 

The government will therefore engage in dialogue with the foundations to clarify whether there 
are appropriate and clear support options for research projects within artificial intelligence and 
data science, including inter-disciplinary research. 

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

47

Initiative 3.2: Stronger digital competences in central 
government 
The need for employees with technological understanding and competences is increasing in 
line with more authorities using artificial intelligence. One of the ambitions of the government 
in the Strategy for ICT Management in Central Government is to enhance digital competences 
in central government. For example, the government will establish a digitisation academy 
offering continuing training courses to generalists in central government.

In order to improve the competences of government IT specialists, the government will 
engage in dialogue with Danish universities working with artificial intelligence at a high level 
with a view to developing courses aimed at IT specialists. The courses will include the latest 
research results and be based on specific experience and projects from relevant authorities.

Initiative 3.3: Strong Danish participation in the EU 
Framework Programme for Research and Innovation
The EU Framework Programme for Research and Innovation has increased focus on 
artificial intelligence. The government will work for strong Danish participation in the area. 
This work will help ensure that potential Danish applicants have a clear understanding of 
their possibilities within artificial intelligence in the Framework Programme (both the current 
Horizon 2020 and the future Horizon Europe), and it will forge better conditions for applicants 
through guidance.

Initiative 3.4: Stronger digital competences through 
adult, continuing and further education
As a result of technological developments, there is a constant need to be able to offer 
opportunities for upgrading skills. The tripartite agreement from October 2017 put focus 
on creating a vocational adult education and training system that is better geared to 
strengthening digital competences of the entire work force and to adapting to the changing 
needs of the labour market. In order to support this, a transition fund of DKK 95 million (EUR 
12.7 million) annually was set up. In addition to the transition fund DKK 8 million (EUR 1.1 
million) is allocated to additional activities. 

In collaboration with the social partners and representatives from higher education institutions, 
the government has set up a vocational adult education and training working group which, 
among other things, will advise on the competence needs of the labour market in the light 
of technological and digital developments. As part of this National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence, the working group will examine whether there is a need to launch initiatives on 
the basis of the development of artificial intelligence, for example in the form of new education 
programmes, analyses and development projects. An annual amount of DKK 5 million (EUR 
670,000) has been allocated for initiatives by the working group. 

  48 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

IV   Increased investment 

in artificial intelligence

Access to risk capital and more experience with artificial 
intelligence are crucial for businesses and authorities to 
develop, test and start using the technology.

Investment in both the private and the public sector is necessary if the growth and prosperity 
potentials from artificial intelligence are to be realised in Denmark. 

Few Danish investments in artificial intelligence, 2008-2018

% of private investment

17.5

17.0

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

R
S
I

N
H
C

A
S
U

D
C
E
O

G
K
H

N
P
J

A
R
F

L
E
B

U
E
D

A
V
L

T
U
A

R
B
G

E
W
S

N
I
F

K
N
D

H
T
R
O
N

Note: 

 The figure shows venture capital, private equity and M&A investments in artificial inte lligence and big 
data companies in the period 2008-2018 in relation to total private investments. The leading position of 
Israel is driven by a strong start-up community within artificial intelligence. The level of investment for 
2018 was calculated in November 2018. The figure does not cover internal investments in businesses. 
Nord indicates the countries Finland, Sweden, the UK and Germany.

Source:  The Impact of Artificial Intelligence in Denmark, McKinsey 2019.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

51

Denmark is currently lagging behind comparable countries such as Finland, Norway and 
Sweden with regard to private investment in artificial intelligence. In the long term, this may 
challenge the competitiveness of Danish businesses. 

Even though some Danish businesses are at an advanced stage with artificial intelligence, the 
level of use in Denmark remains relatively low. Only 5% of businesses are currently using the 
technology. Of all large Danish businesses with 250 or more employees, only one in five uses 
artificial intelligence. There is thus still a large untapped potential.

Large businesses use more artificial intelligence, 2018

% of companies

20

16

12

8

4

0

10 - 49 

                 50 - 99                      100 - 250                        250+

employees

Note:  

 Data only available for businesses with more than 10 employees. Artificial intelligence is measured as 
the use of machine learning. 

Source:   Statistics Denmark 2018.

A similar picture exists for the public sector. A survey of Danish municipalities shows that 
only 3% of municipalities are currently using artificial intelligence to improve their services. 
However, as many as 55% expect to have implemented the technology in some areas within 
the next three years (KMD Analyse, 2018).

In order to stimulate investment in artificial intelligence in both the public and the private 
sectors, it is therefore necessary to generate, gather and disseminate experience with the 
technology and its uses. This will increase the knowledge of employees and leaders about 
what artificial intelligence can and cannot be used for. At the same time, this will promote a 
more well-established market for consultancy and services within artificial intelligence.

  52 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

The government will therefore launch a number of initiatives to promote investment in the 
public sector and among businesses developing Danish solutions. The initiatives are to help 
boost development, testing and use of artificial intelligence by improving access to capital, 
consultancy services and experience in the area. 

Pilot project on digital inquiries in the education sector

The Danish Ministry of Education is an example of a public authority that receives many 
inquiries from both institutions and citizens. Therefore, a pilot project will be launched as 
part of the National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence on use of chatbots by the Ministry of 
Education. A chatbot could be used in direct contact with citizens, but it could also serve 
as a support tool for employees who engage in dialogue with citizens.

 
 
Furthermore, the government will work to attract to Denmark international businesses with 
core competences within artificial intelligence. This will attract specialist knowledge and labour 
to Denmark and create an entrepreneurial environment for artificial intelligence in Denmark.

The initiatives will support implementation of artificial intelligence in the public sector. The 
ambition of the government is to allocate with the municipalities and the regions DKK 200 
million (almost EUR 27 million) to establish an investment fund to test and deploy new 
technologies and digital welfare solutions in municipalities and regions. Together with 
initiatives already launched, the fund will have a total investment budget of DKK 410 million 
(EUR 55 million) up to 2022.

Especially businesses are dependent on being able to test new products and solutions. 
Therefore, performance contracts have been set up with seven Danish GTS institutes 
(approved technological service institutes) to test new solutions. More than DKK 600 
million (EUR 80.5 million) have been set aside to develop technological services for Danish 
businesses for the period 2019-2020. This will supplement the funding that has been set aside 
under Innovation Fund Denmark, which also promotes new technological solutions, see focus 
area 3.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

53

Government initiatives

The government will implement the following initiatives:

1.  Signature projects
2.  More investment in Danish businesses
3.  Exploration of the possibility of an investment agreement with the EU 
4.  Increased knowledge-sharing across public authorities 
5.  Denmark as an attractive growth environment

The initiatives supplement existing efforts: 

Investment fund for new digital technologies and digital welfare solutions

• 
•  Performance contracts with GTS institutes (approved technological service provider)
•  Strategy for Denmark’s Digital Growth

Initiative 4.1: Signature projects 

Using artificial intelligence holds great potential to offer better and more effective treatment in 
the healthcare system, more targeted case processing in the social sector, as well as quicker 
case processing at citizen service centres and in many other areas.

With World-class digital services, the government has launched a new investment fund aimed 
at municipalities and regions to boost the use of artificial intelligence and dissemination of 
digital welfare solutions. 

However, there is a lack of experience. The government will implement a number of signature 
projects as quickly as possible to gather experiences of the use of artificial intelligence in the 
public sector. 

The projects will test the technology in areas with a potential to enhance the quality and 
productivity of public-sector core tasks; however, specific experience in these areas is 
currently insufficient. Experience from these projects will contribute to mature solutions that 
can be used in all of Denmark. 

The signature projects will be based on a public operating task, in which a solution with 
artificial intelligence that can provide better services for citizens has been developed in 
collaboration between the public sector and the private sector.

The government has selected three areas where signature projects will be launched: 
healthcare, the social and employment areas as well as cross-authority case processing. 
Common for the three areas is the large volume of tasks, and using artificial intelligence can 

  54 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

thereby benefit many citizens. At the same time, due to the abundance of data, these three 
areas provide a good basis for testing artificial intelligence.

Within each area, projects will be selected in collaboration with municipalities and regions in 
connection with the annual budget agreements. The projects selected will receive funding to 
test the use of artificial intelligence. Signature projects will be followed up and new signature 
projects will be launched in the strategy period for 2019-2022. 

All signature projects will be implemented in accordance with the ethical principles that 
constitute the common framework for development and use of artificial intelligence. 

Healthcare areas
Artificial intelligence can help improve the healthcare sector by improving patient treatment 
and optimising hospital operation. In addition to signature projects, objectives for healthcare 
will be set (see the chapter on priority areas) which support the proposed healthcare reform 
and a stronger, close and cohesive healthcare system, and thus have a structural and long-
term perspective. 

Example of a signature project: Healthcare areas

Artificial intelligence for quality development in primary healthcare:  
In primary healthcare, the technology can be used to support the work of general 
practitioners. With help from the technology, physicians will be able to notify the normal 
test results and identify abnormal test results more quickly. Artificial intelligence can 
also serve as decision support and, for example by assisting physicians in common 
tasks and diagnosing rare diseases.

 
 
Within healthcare, artificial intelligence is likely to help quicker and better treatment in areas 
such as planning cancer treatment, predicting the course of diseases, time-critical diagnostics 
in the acute area as well as decision support for general practitioners regarding rare diseases.

Social and employment areas
In the social area, artificial intelligence can contribute to more individualised efforts, so that 
citizens are referred to the right place from the very beginning. Case officers can receive 
decision support for preventive and individualised efforts on the basis of knowledge from 
previous cases. 

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

55

Example of a signature project: Social and employment areas

Artificial intelligence for targeted employment efforts 
Using artificial intelligence will potentially shorten unemployment periods. Analysing 
patterns in historical data on successful efforts will make it easier for case officers to 
target employment efforts to the individual citizen.

 
 
Artificial intelligence can be used in the employment area to better match citizens and 
businesses on the basis of job ads and applications. Artificial intelligence can potentially 
customise an optimal course for the individual citizen to get a job quickly, and better target 
programmes for citizens. Moreover, artificial intelligence can screen for possible long-term 
unemployed individuals in order to offer preventive measures.

Cross-authority case processing
Each year, the public administration processes millions of cases and it is contacted millions of 
times by citizens and businesses. Artificial intelligence can utilise data in new ways to improve 
the quality of citizen service centres, make problem-solving more efficient, and increasing 
confidence in the public administration.

Among other things, the technology can automate sorting inquiries and prepare inquiries for 
processing. This means that case officers can concentrate on the most critical cases. 

Optimisation within case processing is relevant across several professional areas, including 
the technical and environmental area, the citizen service centres, the benefits area, the 
subsidies administration area, etc.

Example of a signature project: Cross-sector case processing

Artificial intelligence for better and quicker case processing in building projects 
Artificial intelligence is likely to be used to reduce processing times when citizens or 
businesses need to get a building project processed. For example, in connection with 
screening applications, comparison with similar projects, categorisation of projects and 
decision support in case processing.

Initiative 4.2: More investment in Danish businesses

The government will launch a pilot project in the form of an investment pool of DKK 20 million 
(EUR 2.7million) over four years, and this will be targeted at enterprises with a business 
model based on artificial intelligence. The fund will be managed by the Danish Growth Fund.

  56 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

The aim of the project is to build a bridge between investors and Danish businesses within 
artificial intelligence and thereby nurture the Danish market for artificial-intelligence solutions. 
The Danish Growth Fund will therefore enter into dialogue with potential private investors 
about co-investing in innovative businesses within artificial intelligence. 

There will be requirements for private co-investment from private investors in businesses 
funded by the Danish Growth Fund with the investment pool, for example. The pool can be 
implemented as loans or equity, depending on the specific need in the individual business.

Given the requirement for private co-financing, the initiative will have a leverage effect, as 
private capital is also invested in the businesses. If the private level of funding is assumed 
to be about 50%, about DKK 40 million (about EUR 5.4 million) will be invested in the 
development of Danish businesses based on artificial intelligence. 

The effect of investments will be regularly reviewed and the project will be adjusted 
accordingly.

Initiative 4.3: Exploration of the possibility of an 
investment agreement with the EU
The Danish Growth Fund assesses that almost 4% of the businesses in which the Fund is 
currently investing have a business model based on artificial intelligence and big data.

In order to promote further investments in artificial intelligence, the Danish Growth Fund 
will examine the possibility of establishing an investment agreement with the upcoming EU 
artificial intelligence foundation in areas that are a natural extension of current investments by 
the Danish Growth Fund. 

The investment agreement will potentially be able to help businesses and entrepreneurs in 
Denmark to gain easier access to funding more risk capital from the EU.

Initiative 4.4: Increased knowledge-sharing across public 
authorities 
The National Centre for Public Sector Innovation (COI) will support more effective deployment 
and use of new technologies, including artificial intelligence, across the public sector. This 
is done by disseminating experience from research and specific testing and deployment 
projects.

COI will also help strengthen public-private collaboration, so that the public sector 
incorporates private sector competences, resources and experience to a greater extent when 
developing services.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

57

Initiative 4.5: Denmark as an attractive growth 
environment
Under the Strategy for Denmark’s Digital Growth, the government has allocated DKK 110 
million (EUR 15 million) for the Digital Hub Denmark initiative, which, among other things, is 
to market and strengthen Denmark’s position as an attractive growth environment for artificial 
intelligence. 

In this connection, initiatives will be launched to promote Danish solutions for global tech 
events and trade missions, to present Danish solutions, to initiate a digital campaign on 
responsible use of artificial intelligence in Denmark, etc. 

At the same time, Digital Hub Denmark will help increase focus on attracting foreign 
investment in the digital area. 

In 2019 , Digital Hub Denmark will also spend up to DKK 7 million (EUR 930,000) to develop 
public-private collaboration models to, among other things, improve the possibilities for life-
science businesses to use, for example artificial intelligence in connection with research into 
health data.

  58 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

Priority  
areas

To lift the work of artificial intelligence in Denmark goals 
are set out within priority areas. 

Artificial intelligence is developing rapidly, and the possibilities are increasing across sectors, 
industries and functions. 

Artificial intelligence will affect all of society. However, in some areas, Denmark has 
particularly good preconditions for using artificial intelligence, for example good data. The 
government has therefore selected four areas where special measures will be implemented 
for work on artificial intelligence. 

These areas are healthcare, energy and utilities, agriculture and transport. The areas have 
been selected as the preconditions for using artificial intelligence are good, for example both 
businesses and authorities have access to high-quality data. Similarly, the EU points to the 
same areas as important in realising the potential of artificial intelligence in Europe. 

On this basis, the government will formulate objectives for how these areas can exploit the 
opportunities within artificial intelligence to strengthen Denmark’s position internationally. The 
objectives will be formulated by the responsible ministries and involving relevant stakeholders. 
The work will be coordinated across ministries and with initiatives that have already been 
launched. 

The objectives will take their outset in the areas’ own ambitions and experience with 
digitisation and work on artificial intelligence. 

The government wants to follow-up artificial intelligence work in the sectors. As part of the 
ongoing work on the National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence, the objectives will therefore be 
followed up to ensure that Denmark reaches the full potential in the areas. The government 
will ensure that the strategic sectors have access to expertise and consultancy in connection 
with preparation and coordination of action plans.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

61

Priority areas 

Healthcare
Artificial intelligence in healthcare can help physicians to diagnose diseases quicker, 
prioritise patients with the most acute needs and contribute to better capacity utilisation 
at hospitals. Similarly, there is potential in supporting more targeted efforts in the local 
healthcare system.

Energy and utilities
Businesses within green energy technology and environmental technology can use 
artificial intelligence to develop new products, services and business models. The products 
can help other businesses as well as consumers to optimise their energy consumption and 
thereby reduce their costs and carbon footprint. 

Agriculture
Artificial intelligence can be used to support the development of precision agriculture in 
order to continue sustainable agriculture in Denmark. By combining data from fields and 
weather data, artificial intelligence can predict which fields need water and fertiliser, and 
make adjustments accordingly. This will benefit the environment as well as agriculture. 

Transport
In the transport area, artificial intelligence can be used in self-driving cars and to ensure 
better and more timely public transport. Furthermore, new solutions can be developed to 
optimise traffic management to benefit users of both public and private transport. 

5.1 Healthcare

The healthcare sector is an area in which expertise and technology are developing, and 
changing the way in which we provide services. The healthcare system has regularly 
transformed technological advances into new opportunities within diagnostics and treatment. 
This provides better results for patients. 

Artificial intelligence is a logical step in this development. The technology can contribute to 
creating a more effective healthcare system offering treatment based on the needs of the 
individual patient. Smart solutions can contribute to improved quality and coherence in patient 
treatment and also help healthcare staff in their tasks. A modern and effective healthcare 
system should therefore take a position on how staff can use artificial intelligence as a tool to 
add value for patients and relatives. 

  62 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

The healthcare system is currently facing a number of challenges: A population where the 
percentage of elderly is increasing, chronic diseases are becoming more challenging, and 
hospitals are having to provide targeted diagnoses as well as high-quality treatment. To deal 
with these challenges, the healthcare sector needs to collaborate closer with the primary 
healthcare sector and municipal care. 

At the same time, there are increasing expectations concerning treatment and procurement 
of new medicine, and there is a growing need to monitor side effects and the effects of 
pharmaceuticals. This stresses the importance of continuous innovative thinking. New, more 
accurate and effective tools must be found to carry out the tasks and deal with the challenges 
that the healthcare system is currently facing and will continue to face in the years to come.

The government has already set a direction for the healthcare system of the future with the 
Digital Health Strategy 2018-2022 and with the health data initiative Health in the future, 
where utilisation of new technologies, such as artificial intelligence, is a common theme. In 
addition, with World-class digital services, the government has allocated funds to deploy and 
test new technologies in the health area, for example.

For patients, artificial intelligence will lead to better, quicker and more customised diagnosis 
and treatment. The technology can also help earlier prediction and prevention of diseases.

For hospitals, artificial intelligence means that new opportunities arise for managing the 
logistics behind patient treatment more efficiently and accurately. This will ultimately benefit 
patients and healthcare professionals as it frees resources for patient contact. 

For physicians – in primary healthcare and at hospitals – artificial intelligence can help them 
make the right decisions. This again means better opportunities for quick and accurate 
diagnosis and better opportunities to focus on patients who require special attention. 

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

63

Project with artificial intelligence in healthcare 

Identification of heart failure 
Together with Corti, the emergency medical services at the Capital Region of Denmark 
have developed a solution which, by listening in when a citizen calls the emergency 
number, can help healthcare staff identify symptoms of heart failure which would not 
otherwise be detected over the phone. In these situations, the healthcare staff will 
receive recommendations or alarms on their screen to help them react quicker and 
correctly in the situation. In 84% of cases, the solution can identify situations of heart 
failure. This is quicker and more precise than the healthcare staff, who could only 
identify 73% of the heart failures correctly.

Artificial intelligence helps analyse CAT and MRI scans
One in six Danes will suffer a coronary thrombosis or brain haemorrhage, and this 
figure will increase as the population gets older. Aarhus University has developed a 
solution which saves time by using artificial intelligence to ’read’ CAT or MRI images 
and to identify how much brain tissue can be saved for a given patient, and how much 
has already been permanently injured. The technology also enables smaller hospitals 
to offer state-of-the-art treatment. This will shorten transport time, thereby increasing 
the possibilities of minimising brain injury for many patients.

 
 
In this development, it is vital that we do not jeopardise the confidence of citizens and 
healthcare staff. Responsible development and use of artificial intelligence is a mandatory 
principle, particularly for patient treatment by the healthcare sector. 

Therefore, citizens, patient associations and Danish businesses should help set the course 
in close collaboration with the health authorities. Clearly, these developments must also 
be within the legislative framework set by the Danish Parliament (the Folketing) regarding 
balanced and responsible use of health data.

In order to ensure cohesive efforts, the government will coordinate efforts and signature 
projects in the healthcare area, including funding from Investment Fund Denmark, with the 
parties within the framework of a more long-term plan for utilisation of new technology and 
innovation in the healthcare area.

  64 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

5.2 Energy and utilities

Denmark is at the forefront with regard to ensuring sustainability, green development and 
sustainable energy. This benefits the environment and is a competitive advantage for Danish 
businesses in a time when green technology is in great demand throughout the world. 

Artificial intelligence can help maintain our leading position and strengthen the green 
transition, for example by ensuring better coordination of production and transport, so that 
only the energy required is produced. This requires a more flexible and integrated supply 
system than today, and that we start using artificial intelligence to a greater extent. 

The potentials are huge for data and the increasing digital transformation of the energy and 
utilities sector. Therefore, with the Energy Agreement, the government has launched initiatives 
to ensure a continued green transition in the energy and utilities sector, for example energy-
efficient buildings. Data and use of artificial intelligence are key in achieving this goal. 

The action plan for smart energy will examine how smart solutions can couple energy 
consumption closer to energy production. The government will also establish regulatory free 
zones that will make it easier to test smart energy solutions. 

The initiatives have added direction and focus to the area. However, it is important to maintain 
this focus if Denmark is to remain at the very forefront. Several countries are currently 
investing and using artificial intelligence to support their green transition. 

Project with artificial intelligence within energy and utilities

Better maintenance of electricity stations
Energinet has installed a number of sensors at selected electricity stations throughout 
Denmark. Artificial intelligence can be used to develop solutions that can recognise 
patterns, for example in sounds, vibrations or temperatures at the installation. The data 
collected can then predict when something at the station deviates from the norm and 
should be maintained or replaced. This releases resources and provides better and 
more effective monitoring for electricity stations.

More flexible and secure electricity supply
Danish electricity consumption fluctuates depending on time of year and time of day. 
By analysing consumption patterns, utility companies can adjust production according 
to demand, thereby saving resources. In the UK, the UK National Grid and DeepMind 
have developed a solution which can reduce energy consumption by up to 10%.

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

65

An important precondition for increasing the use of artificial intelligence in the energy and 
utilities sector is access to good data. For example, consumption data from electricity and 
water meters and from sensors in pipes, pumping systems and thermostats makes it possible 
to develop solutions which can optimise production and supply according to demand. 

Release of consumption data in the utilities sector is one of the recommendations that has just 
been made by the growth team for green energy and environmental technology. In the Energy 
Agreement, the government has set up a secretariat for digitised public-sector services in the 
utilities sector, which, among other things, is to look at how utilities data can be made more 
accessible.

In addition to contributing to the green transition, better geodata can also help the business 
community to develop new and innovative solutions. For instance, good data can help 
telecommunications operators when new underground cables are to be laid, or the insurance 
sector where up-to-date data is necessary to calculate fair insurance premiums in the event of 
flooding and storm damage.

In order to create conditions for efficiency improvements and good growth opportunities in the 
business community, it is vital that geodata, including maps is up-to-date.

Today, mapping is carried out using aerial photographs, and the photos are then partly 
processed manually. This is expensive, and it takes a long time. Production time is particularly 
determined by how long data processing takes.

The government will therefore launch a new project entitled “Automatic photo recognition 
GeoDanmark” to provide access to better and up-to-date map data. A pilot project will be 
carried out on automatic identification of changes to buildings using artificial intelligence. This 
will make it easier to access map data and develop new solutions, for example to plan routes. 

Up-to-date map data will also help in the public sector. It will make it easier for municipalities 
to prepare local development plans and follow up on flooding. 

In the long term, the ambition is to automate the entire process of mapping Denmark, and 
the possibility to make the underlying algorithms available to the business community will be 
examined. 

5.3 Agriculture

The agricultural sector has been a cornerstone of Danish society for centuries. Danish farms 
are some of the most efficient in the world. This is because the sector has kept up with the 
times and has continuously embraced new technologies. This is a competitive advantage that 
Denmark must maintain by continuing to develop its agricultural sector with new technology.

More use of new solutions that can increase efficiency in Danish agriculture is necessary. 
The agricultural sector is currently not only under pressure financially, but also in terms of 
access to qualified labour. Climate change demands new forms of production and efficient 

  66 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

exploitation of manure and pesticides. Finally, agricultural land is increasingly overloaded and 
it is being degraded by heavy machinery. 

In agriculture, artificial intelligence enables farmers to spray exactly where weeds are growing 
and fertilise exactly where the yield can be increased, whilst protecting the areas with the 
highest runoff risks. Better use of resources will save the individual farmer money and benefit 
the environment.

In this way, using new technology can support the development of precision agriculture, so 
that sustainable agriculture can continue in Denmark.

Developing the agricultural sector will be on the industry’s own terms and initiative. However, 
the government will provide the required framework in order to seize the opportunities for 
growth and improved competitiveness brought by artificial intelligence. 

In partnership with the agricultural sector, the government has initiated a number of pilot 
projects. One project is examining how the amount of manure can be varied according to the 
needs of crops. This is possible by using data collected from sensors in the soil. 

Irrigation is another area in which smart solutions can contribute to more intelligent and 
sustainable development. There is no reason to irrigate more than necessary, and field 
irrigation of sandy soils in correct doses can increase yields by up to 40%.

The government will also initiate a new “Intelligent irrigation” pilot project using artificial 
intelligence to develop a solution for intelligent crop irrigation. A system will be developed to 
predict irrigation needs and manage field irrigation. By creating new algorithms and combining 
weather data from weather stations and field data, the project will develop a system to predict 
which fields need irrigation and register where, when and how much has been irrigated. The 
possibility to adjust the level of irrigation to the actual needs for individual fields will benefit 
everyone. It will protect the environment, make work easier for farmers and enhance the 
competitiveness of Danish agriculture. 

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

67

Project with artificial intelligence within agriculture

Agrointelli
This year, the Danish company Agrointelli launched their self-driving Robotti robot. The 
robot can be used for seedbed preparation, sowing, mechanical cleaning or to add 
nutrients. It navigates via GPS and optimises its own route in the field using artificial 
intelligence.

The Swiss Ecorobotix
Ecorobotix makes autonomous weeding solutions by combining robots and artificial 
intelligence. The solution can reduce pesticides use by up to 90%. 

Herd Navigator
Herd Navigator is a fully automatic solution developed in Denmark to monitor the 
reproduction and health of cows. The solution conducts online analysis of data from 
sensors and cows and this provides farmers with information about animal health, 
reproduction and nutrition, etc. 

5.4 Transport

Artificial intelligence has the potential to improve Danes’ mobility and at the same time help 
make transport in Denmark safer, cheaper and greener. Advances within artificial intelligence 
can improve self-driving transport, enable delivery by drones, and optimise digital mobility 
solutions. Common for these advances is that they are largely based on effective access to, 
and analysis of, data. 

The Mobility for the Future expert group (2018) sees great benefits from exploiting the 
capacity of the transport system through optimised traffic management and use of real-time 
data about traffic. 

The transport sector has many private and public players on the market. Through more 
extensive data exchange, new solutions and business models based on artificial intelligence 
are likely to be developed. 

Due to the high level of digitisation, Denmark is in a favourable position to utilise transport 
data. For example, increased exchange of data on timetables and real-time updates of 
operations and delays in public transport will prepare the ground for new public mobility 
services and business models. 

At the same time, driver-assist technologies, and in the long term, driverless technologies, will 
be able to utilise real-time data to optimise route planning and improve safety. In September 
2018, the Easier Public Transport policy initiative was launched. It contains a number of 
initiatives to promote the development of digital mobility services linking planning, payment 
and ticketing across private and public modes of transport. 

  68 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

For example, an initiative will be launched to ensure that transport data from public transport 
operators, including statistical and selected dynamic transport data, is shared and made freely 
available. It is also proposed that public transport operators enable resale of selected tickets 
through a third party, and this will support the market’s possibility to develop new digital and 
innovative mobility solutions. 

Project with artificial intelligence within transport

Fuel-efficient routes
Independent Research Fund Denmark is supporting a research project on the use of 
artificial intelligence that can guide transport operators to choose the quickest and most 
fuel-efficient route using big data on how traffic is moving at different times during the 
day. In collaboration with researchers from the US and Australia, researchers from 
Aalborg University will develop algorithms that can manage systems associated with 
great uncertainty. Independent Research Fund Denmark has granted DKK 5.8 million 
(EUR 800,000) to the project.

 
 
Artificial intelligence can also help prevent congestion. By analysing anonymised location data 
for mobile phones, it is possible to predict traffic flows and design better urban spaces and 
infrastructure.

The government will initiate a new “Better use of location data for mobile phones” pilot 
project in collaboration with the telecommunications industry. This initiative will support 
Denmark as a data-ethical frontrunner that also develops new innovative databased 
technologies. The pilot project will clarify the legal and data-ethical frameworks for displaying 
and using location data, and it will test the commercial possibilities of using location data for 
artificial intelligence. The data used in the pilot project will be aggregated and anonymised 
ensuring that only non-personal data are used.

Under the pilot project, the government will establish a closed ‘sandbox’ with anonymised 
and aggregated location data. This will provide a secure environment in which the authorities 
control access to data. Trials aimed at businesses will be initiated as ‘challenges’ and 
‘hackathons’, where selected businesses will have access to data in the closed ‘sandbox’. 
Among other things, the trials will identify aggregation levels of data that secure the anonymity 
of individuals, and at the same time trials will enable development of intelligent solutions to 
benefit citizens, businesses and authorities. 

 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019 

69

Initiatives in the strategy

Focus areas

A responsible foundation for artificial intelligence

I. 
1.1  Ethical principles for artificial intelligence
1.2  Establishment of the Data Ethics Council
1.3  Security and artificial intelligence 
1.4  Legal clarity on development and use of artificial intelligence
1.5  Transparent use of artificial intelligence
1.6  Ethically responsible and sustainable use of data by the business community
1.7  Danish imprint on standards for artificial intelligence

II.  More and better data
2.1  Common Danish language resource
2.2  Better access to public-sector data
2.3  More data in the cloud for artificial intelligence
2.4 

Improved access to data outside Denmark for Danish businesses and researchers

III.  Strong competences and new knowledge
3.1  Dialogue with research funding foundations on artificial intelligence.
3.2  Stronger digital competences in central government
3.3  Strong Danish participation in the EU Framework Programme for Research and 

Innovation

3.4  Stronger digital competences through adult, continuing and further education

Increased investment in artificial intelligence

IV. 
4.1  Signature projects
4.2  More investment in Danish businesses
4.3  Exploration of the possibility of an investment agreement with the EU
4.4 
4.5  Denmark as an attractive growth environment 

Increased knowledge-sharing across public authorities

Priority areas

•  Healthcare
•  Energy and utilities
•  Agriculture
•  Transport

  70 

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence  ·  March 2019

2018/19:19

March 2019

Ministry of Finance
Christiansborg Slotsplads 1
DK-1218 København K
Tel: +45 3392 3333
Email: fm@fm.dk

Ministry of Industry,  
Business and Financial Affairs
Slotsholmsgade 10-12
DK-1216 København K
Tel: +45 3392 3350
Email: em@em.dk

ISBN 978-87-93823-13-6 (pdf version)
ISBN 978-87-93823-12-9 (print version)

Design, cover: e-Types
Photo: Getty Images
Print: Rosendahls

The publication is available for download at
www.fm.dk  /  www.em.dk  /  www.regeringen.dk

Ministry of Finance
Christiansborg Slotsplads 1
DK-1218 København K
Tel: +45 3392 3333

Ministry of Industry,  
Business and Financial Affairs
Slotsholmsgade 10-12
DK-1216 København K
Tel: +45 3392 3350

