This document presents the Hellenic National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence (AI), as developed by a 
multidisciplinary team of Greek Scientists and AI Experts under the auspices and supervision of the Ministry of 
Digital Governance.  
The strategy is aligned to the EU policies and recommendations for AI, as well as to relevant initiatives (e.g., 
the EU HLEG expert group, Council of Europe on AI (CAHAI), AI4EU, AI4People). Moreover, its development has 
considered international best practices from the strategies of other EU-27 countries and the UK, as well as 
from other prominent AI strategies outside the EU. However, the development of the AI Strategy is primarily 
driven by the socio-economic priorities of the country, including:
*	Economic Growth: Following more than ten years of economic recession and staggering growth during 
2008-2019, Greece is set to face the dramatic economic implications of the COVID19 pandemic. 
Investments in research and innovation such as AI provide first-class opportunities for restarting the Greek 
economy and increasing its competitiveness in effective and sustainable ways. In this direction, the 
strategy includes many activities that can boost the economic growth of Greek enterprises, including large 
industries, SME (Small Medium Enterprises) and high-tech Centres. 
*	Digital Transformation: Despite the low ranking of the country in the DESI (Digital Economy and Society 
Index) standings, Greece has a positive digital transformation momentum. During the past two years, the 
rebranded Ministry of Digital Governance has rolled out a rich set of digital services, established digital 
transformation policies, and expedited the development of various digital infrastructures. These initiatives 
have a positive and tangible impact on the Greek society and are well accepted by the citizens. The 
country has recently released a detailed digital transformation roadmap as part of the country's digital 
transformation strategy that is conveniently called "Digital Bible".  In this context, AI can serve as a 
catalyst for the accelerated implementation of the on-going digital transformation of the country.
*	Boosting EU Values and Fundamental Rights: As the birthplace of democracy, Greece has always had an 
instrumental role in shaping and boosting EU values. Therefore, developing AI systems and solutions that 
respect fundamental rights and democratic values, comply with European legislation, and benefit the 
society without exclusions as well as the environment is a priority that inspires the Greek society. In 
addition to embracing these values in its national AI ecosystem, Greece plans to undertake a pioneering 
role in spreading them across the entire EU AI ecosystem.  
To successfully address the above listed socio-economic priorities the strategy sets three top-level objectives 
being:
*	AI-based Economic Growth: The strategy aims at stimulating growth in the private sector of the economy, 
using AI as a catalyst for improving the competitiveness of Greek businesses. It includes activities that 
facilitate AI adoption by private enterprises, as well as actions aiming at attracting private sector 
investment. The collaboration of the AI research community with the private sector is strongly encouraged 
and facilitated.  Emphasis in paid in activities that support innovative SMEs (including high-tech) start-ups 
to develop novel AI solutions that could have a global impact. In this direction, the strategy capitalizes on 
Greece's vibrant start-ups ecosystem.
*	Accelerated Transformation of the Greek Public Sector: As part of this objective, the strategy aims at 
accelerating the on-going digital transformation of the public administration using AI as a disruptive digital 
enabler. In this direction a rich set of reference projects are described, including projects with a tangible 
impact on the effectiveness of the public administration, the quality of services offered to citizens, as well 
as on the resilience of the country's infrastructures. Actions that foster the capacity of the public 
administration to implement AI projects are also proposed, along with projects that build trust among 
citizens regarding the adoption and use of AI. The strategy is perfectly aligned to the country's Digital Bible 
and the projects described therein. Moreover, it leverages on-going digital transformation initiatives as a 
means of rapidly bootstrapping the development of AI projects and maximizing their value for money.  
*	"AI Democratisation" with Greece in a Leading Role:  This strategic objective aims at establishing a 
unique socio-technical and legal environment for the development of ethical, trustworthy, democratic, 
and responsible AI systems that are accessible and beneficial to all citizens and nature. The overarching 
target is to ensure that fundamental rights and democratic values of the citizens are always respected, 
fully in-line with EU values. As part of this objective, the strategy sets the ambitious and visionary target of 
establishing Greece as a leader in the Democratization of AI in EU, through a value-centric democratic and 
democratised approach to AI that will be adopted through the implementation of pioneering projects that 
will provide unique social, technological and sustainability showcases. In addition to these, an aggressive 
strategy for internationalizing these projects and boosting the EU-level standardization of an "AI 
Democratization" framework is developed.
To accomplish these objectives, the strategy identifies and leverages the core competencies of the country, 
while planning for the mitigation of possible risks. Most importantly the strategy plans to develop 
complementary assets for AI development and adoption, including the required technological infrastructures 
and human capital. In terms of technological infrastructures, the strategy makes provisions for establishing 
large-scale databases, supercomputing infrastructures, AI experimentation infrastructures and testbeds, high-
speed networking infrastructures (5G), as well as cybersecurity infrastructures. Likewise, human capital 
development is addressed at all levels based on a holistic approach. The latter extends from school and 
university education to the reskilling of private sector employees and public servants. Emphasis is also paid in 
the development of critical mass for excellent AI research ranging from basic research to applied research that 
will be carried out based on synergies between private enterprises and research centres. 
The key projects and actions of the strategy are structured around three high level policy areas, namely AI 
Enabling Framework (Policy Area I); AI for Economic Growth and Digital Transformation (Policy Area II) and AI 
Principles (Policy Area III), which include the six following fine-grained Strategic Targets (STs): 
Policy Area I: AI Enabling Framework
*	ST1: The Development of National AI Infrastructure, which includes actions that aim at creating or 
enhancing AI infrastructures like databases, supercomputers, and experimentation infrastructures. 
*	ST2: AI Research, Education & Skills Capital, which focuses on the development of the human capital 
needed for the successful development, deployment, operation of AI systems. Training is addressed at all 
levels (i.e., primary and secondary education, university education, professional training, public sector 
training). It also addresses the development of capacity and critical mass for basic and industrial research 
that will lead to disruptive innovations and excellent research results.     
*	ST3: AI Innovation Ecosystem, which comprises activities that foster the creation of a vibrant AI 
innovation ecosystem that will provide growth opportunities to suppliers of AI solutions. The 
establishment of AI centres and DIH (Digital Innovation Hubs) is foreseen, along with a rich set of support 
activities such as, mentoring SMEs and supporting them in access to finance. To foster innovation 
development, activities engaging the demand-side (e.g., utilities and large state-owned enterprises) are 
also planned.  
Policy Area II: AI for Economic Growth and Digital Transformation
*	ST4: AI for the Private Sector, which aggregates the full range of activities that are destined to boost AI-
based private sector growth. It comprises actions that encourage and facilitate data sharing in the private 
sector, along with activities that support enterprises in accessing AI resources (e.g., Supercomputing 
resources and AI testbeds). Emphasis is paid in fostering collaboration between private enterprises and 
research centres. 
*	ST5: AI for the Public Administration, which includes the implementation of reference AI projects in the 
public administration, along with actions that unlock the innovation capacity of the public administration. 
The planned activities are streamlined with the digital transformation activities of the country as reflected 
in the "Digital Bible".
Policy Area III: AI Principles
*	ST6: Ethical, Trustworthy and Democratic AI for All, which comprises technical, legal, and regulatory 
development activities towards ethical, responsible, and inclusive AI systems. Innovative and pioneering 
projects (e.g., the development of an "Ethical AI Label") are foreseen towards setting Greece apart in the 
development of AI systems that respect EU values and citizens' fundamental rights. 
For the effective implementation of the strategy, the following governance-related instruments and 
institutional projects will be established:
*	A Supervising Committee, which will be responsible for coordinating and monitoring the actions of the 
strategy.
*	An AI Observatory destined to monitor the AI activities of the strategy and their implementation progress 
based on tangible KPIs.
*	An AI Training Academy as the segment of the National Digital Academy that will oversee the AI- related 
education and training activities of the public sector.
*	An International Expert Advisory Board of world class AI experts that will provide external guidance and 
advise to the AI Supervising Committee, enhancing and optimising the actions of the strategy.
*	An AI Auditing Body that will provide the requirements and audit the trustworthiness of AI systems and 
application thereof as well as whether they are aligned with the necessary ethical, trustworthy, 
democratic, and legal principles. 
*	The AI Politeia, an independent, multi-disciplinary think tank and thought leadership body that will 
establish a global dialogue around Ethical, Trustworthy and Democratic AI, respecting the rights and 
welfare, of both humans and nature, at all times. 
*	A National AI Marketplace that will serve as a single access point to AI resources in the country, including 
datasets, data catalogues, Machine Learning and Deep Learning models, success stories, catalogues of 
national infrastructures and more.
*	A Label for Ethical and Democratic AI to pave the way for responsible, trustworthy and democratic AI 
innovation conveying the right trust assurances to citizens and society. Greece will pursue the 
standardisation of this Label at a European level and in collaboration with all European countries. 
In the scope of the implementation of the strategy, Greece will also pursue targeted international 
Collaborations with other EU countries for the purpose of knowledge transfer and experience sharing, 
including sharing of proven best practices.
The present document represents the first release of the Strategy.  The Ministry of Digital Governance is 
committed to continually monitoring the implementation of the strategy, as a means of assessing its progress, 
revising its contents, and taking corrective action when required. The present document is therefore the initial 
version of a "living" document that will be regularly updated subject to a continuous improvement discipline.  
Overall, this strategy aspires to provide a sound basis for creating a vibrant AI ecosystem that will benefit the 
Greek Society and Economy, while providing a unique contribution to EU's Strategic Targets for AI, notably in 
terms of the EU-wide "Democratisation" of AI.    


 
1.	INTRODUCTION TO THE NATIONAL STRATEGY
1.1	BACKGROUND 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the theory and development of systems and methods that can perform tasks 
normally requiring human intelligence. AI, including Machine Learning (ML) have started to transform the 
global economy.  It can be seen as a new industry in its own right, whilst transforming business models across 
sectors. Advances in computing and the increasing availability of data are key drivers of the current upsurge of 
AI [EC-COM(2020)65]. 
Europe targets to combine its technological and industrial strengths with a high-quality digital infrastructure 
and a regulatory framework based on its fundamental values to become a global leader in innovation in AI and 
its applications to the whole of European society and economy. Europe has set up the objective to improve 
citizens' way of living, by generating AI-enabled infrastructures and policies that are able to produce new 
products and services in various areas, including healthcare, education, public/civil/governmental/citizen-
oriented services, transport, cybersecurity, farming, the green and circular economy, fashion and tourism, as 
well as to optimise operational conditions, thus reducing costs, energy and waste, equipping law enforcement 
authorities with appropriate tools to ensure the security of citizens and respect their rights and freedoms. 
Given the major impact that AI can have on our society and the need to build trust, it is vital that AI is 
grounded in our values and fundamental rights, such as human dignity and privacy protection. Furthermore, 
the impact of AI systems should be considered not only from an individual perspective, but also from the 
perspective of the society as a whole. The use of AI systems can have a significant role in achieving the 
Sustainable Development Goals and in supporting the democratic process and social rights, while taking into 
account all environmental impacts. As digital technology becomes an ever more central part of every aspect of 
people's lives, people should be able to trust it. Trustworthiness is a prerequisite for AI uptake [EC-
COM(2020)65]. 
The development of the National Strategy of AI took place in 2020. It is a result of the collaboration of some of 
the most prominent AI experts in the country, which worked together under the auspices and supervision of 
the Ministry of Digital Governance. The team that developed the strategy is multi-disciplinary with a strong 
understanding of the peculiarities of the Greek environment and active participation in most of the AI-related 
initiatives of the country. Specifically, the team in charge of the strategy has a strong footprint in major digital 
transformation initiatives, data economy projects, supercomputing initiatives and the AI research projects in 
both Greece and EU. The development of the strategy has taken into account number key policy documents 
and relevant background studies regarding the pressing socio-economic challenges of the country and the role 
of digital transformation in addressing these challenges. It has also considered recommendation for the 
development of Greece's national strategy provided in the scope of the close collaboration of the Ministry of 
Digital Governance with DG REFORM
 
Figure 1: Hellenic National AI Strategy, a dynamic and evolving process 

1.2	DRIVING PRINCIPLES
The development of the strategy has been driven by the following top-level principles:
*	Alignment to the European Strategy for AI, which reflects the European Values and European Innovation 
Strategy [EC-COM (2020)65]. The present strategy is in-line with EU's strategy for AI, as the latter is 
reflected in relevant policy documents and AI-related consultations between member states. 
*	Streamlining of AI activities with Greece's Digital Transformation Strategy. The activities of the strategy 
benefit from their alignment with on-going and planned activities for the wider Digital Transformation of 
the country.  A rich set of such activities are included in the country's Digital Bible, which has been 
recently put into public consultation by the Ministry of Digital Governance . The alignment of the present 
strategy to the Digital Bible is aimed at taking advantage of the country's significant digital transformation 
momentum, making best use of the available resources, and maximizing the overall value for money of 
the strategy. 
*	Addressing the country's peculiar needs and priorities. Much as the strategy takes into account 
international best practices, it also considers the peculiarities of the country, including Greece's strengths 
and weaknesses in terms of AI development. Specifically, the strategy leverages strengths such as 
Greece's prominent positioning in various AI-related European initiatives (e.g., AI4EU), the excellent 
research community of the country, as well as the country's vibrant and growing start-up community. 
However, it also attempts to alleviate weaknesses such as its rather weak innovation ecosystem and its 
low ranking in the DESI index.
*	Pursuing a practical approach that emphasizes implementation and tangible outcomes. The strategy 
includes a very rich set of concrete actions and practical AI projects, which will help the country progress 
in a tangible way. In a sense, the Strategy is largely practical, and project based. 
1.3	THE STRATEGY'S MAIN OBJECTIVES
The National Strategy on Artificial Intelligence defines the framework and the policy for developing and 
implementing AI in Greece, structured in a set of coordinated and interconnected actions, with the clear aim of 
maximising potential benefits and minimising potential pitfalls for the economy and society. 
The strategy is aligned to the EU policies and recommendations for AI, as well as to relevant initiatives (e.g., 
AI4EU, Open-DEI and the EU HLEG expert group). Moreover, its development has considered international best 
practices from the strategies of other EU-27 countries and the UK [AIWatch2020], as well as from other 
prominent AI strategies outside the EU. However, the development of the strategy is primarily driven by the 
socio-economic priorities of the country, including Economic Growth, Digital Transformation and the 
promotion of EU Values and Fundamental Rights.
To successfully address these priorities, the Strategy sets three core objectives, namely the formulation of a 
roadmap for AI-driven economic growth, the acceleration of the digital transformation of the Public Sector, 
and the Democratisation of AI, with Greece having a leading role in the global efforts towards the latter. The 
rest of the chapter provides details on the methodology followed for producing an actionable implementation 
strategy for realising these core objectives.

1.4	STRUCTURE OF THE DOCUMENT
The rest of the document is organised as follows: Chapter 2 presents the exploratory analysis of existing 
National AI Strategies, under the prism of Greece's AI landscape and elicits the major lessons learnt from the 
analysis and core collaboration paths for serving Greece's strategy. Chapter 3 provides a detailed overview of 
the Strategy's vision and goals, as well as the methodology to be adopted for its implementation. Chapters 4-9 
are devoted to the presentation of each one of the main Strategic Targets. Each chapter includes a set of 
detailed actions that are planned towards achieving each target. Chapter 10 is the final and concluding version 
of the strategy, which summarizes the key strategic objectives and how they reinforce each other.


 
2.	GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM
2.1	BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
Artificial Intelligence (AI), in its 65-year history as a scientific discipline, has encountered multiple cycles of 
radical developments and optimism followed by periods of relative disappointment and retreat. This actually 
reflects the relative ambiguity of the term, as it is difficult to strictly define what constitutes AI technology. The 
current burst of technological innovations and their rapid application in different research and industrial 
domains has even challenged to a degree the persistent notion that AI, to qualify as such, should in some way 
mimic human cognition, with neural architectures exhibiting learning paths different from the ones associated 
with human intelligence. From a utilitarian perspective, a historically and practically important distinction is 
that between Weak (or narrow) and Strong (or general) AI [Searle80; Frankish14]. The former refers to 
technologies that are designed and tailored to carry out a specific task with a clearly defined goal and 
pathways to achieve it. The latter applies to technologies targeting more open-ended and complex activities 
that are commonly perceived to require human intelligence and cognitive capacity.
Both categories are scientifically, financially, and socially relevant albeit in different ways and with different 
impacts on the current societal and economic landscape. An effective AI strategy must thus take into account 
the particularities of each category, and devise targets and actions for effectively advancing technology and 
using it practically and impactfully. At the same time, a strategy must consider the factors that affect 
technology penetration, like its potential to disrupt specific market sectors and the job market as a whole, the 
degree of transparency and clarity with respect to how the technology works, and ultimately the acceptance of 
its existence in everyday citizen and economic life of the country.
We thus identify three major Policy Areas that must be covered in order to simultaneously achieve scientific 
and technological advancement, strong industry penetration and high adoption of AI technologies:
1.	The establishment of sufficient Key AI Infrastructural Enablers (Compute & Data Infrastructures, 
Research, Education, Skills & Capacity Building initiatives, and the nourishment and support of an 
Innovation Ecosystem around AI) that will support and sustain the development of AI in Greece.
2.	The analysis and prioritisation of Key Application Areas for Economic Growth and Digital 
Transformation where AI can have the greater impact, in the Private and the Public sector.
3.	Furthermore, and as an overarching third policy area AI Principles, stressing the importance of 
applying and supporting by design ethical and democratic values when implementing and using AI. 
2.2	OVERVIEW OF THE AI STRATEGIES ACROSS THE 3 POLICY AREAS
Greece is one of the last EU countries to release its National AI Strategy. Therefore, the country is bound to 
have a delayed start in the implementation of some key AI activities. This delayed start can be perceived as a 
weakness, which obliges the country to plan for an accelerated implementation of some of the core activities 
of the strategy. Nevertheless, this late start represents an opportunity as well: It enables the country to benefit 
from experiences of other EU countries that have started earlier, as well as from international best practices 
regarding the contents and implementation methodology of a successful AI strategy. Furthermore, there are 
lessons to be learnt from the practices of countries considered as Innovation Leaders (Denmark, Finland, 
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and Sweden) and Strong Innovators (Austria, Belgium, Estonia, France, 
Germany, Ireland, and Portugal) according to the European Innovation Scoreboard (EIS).
To this end, an overview of existing strategic priorities for all three policy areas, is presented, based on an in-
depth review of the available AI landscape reports, and published national AI strategies. The review covered 
the countries examined in the CIFAR 2020 report [CIFAR20], that analyses the strategies of the top-15 global 
economies, as well as all EC countries that have published their strategies. Focal points and strategic actions 
were collected and filtered in terms of novelty of the proposed strategic action as well as applicability in the 
Greek economic and social landscape. Promising directions were organised under the three main policy areas, 
and further classified in coherent categories within each area.
As different reports and strategies use different organisation systems for grouping their targets and actions, 
we reassigned several of the identified priorities under our overall AI layered prism.
The classification system foresees distinct categories for key AI infrastructural enablers (Infrastructure, 
Research, Education, Skills) and a coarse granularity regarding application areas (separating public and private 
sector). Even so, the analysis of strategic targets and actions foresee instruments for meeting and adapting to 
sector-specific challenges. Finally, the AI Principles area is refined into categories addressing ethical and 
inclusion issues, with legal and regulatory issues comprising a category of their own and evolving in tandem 
with the priorities set by all other categories.
The following table presents these categories considered critical for the three policy areas, along with 
summative lists of promising initiatives identified in the strategies of different countries. Major points are 
further analysed in the subsequent subsections per policy area and sub-category.
Key Policy Areas
Indicative Strategic Actions
AI Infrastructural 
Enablers
Data and Digital 
Infrastructure
 	Develop a data ecosystem that provides access to high-quality 
data (public datasets) and facilitate data sharing (i.e., shared 
data platforms (France)) and data exchange across stakeholder 
for the development of AI tools across sectors, e.g., via 
Innovation Hubs and Competence/Excellence centres.
 	Develop open data policies for growth (France) and open data 
portal (i.e., Estonia).
 	Develop criteria for companies to build data partnership 
(Germany).
 	Develop tools in local languages and provide free language 
resources to support language technologies (i.e., Denmark).
 	Develop "Small Data" AI solutions (Finland).
 	Sandboxes and testbeds for developing and testing data-driven 
AI solutions (Japan).
 	National AI platform for research, innovation and fostering AI 
across the private and public sectors, while also supporting 
education, research, and collaborations (i.e., Aurora AI- 
Finland, AI Innovation of Sweden, Slovak.AI - Slovakia).
 	Development national supporting infrastructures, such as 
supercomputing infrastructure (i.e., Spain), secure cloud 
environments (i.e., Denmark), digital security ecosystem and 
toolbox (Finland), and broadband/5G networks.

Research
 	Establish national AI research centres of excellence and foster 
collaborations with European network of AI research 
excellence centres as well as international ones.
 	Develop a digital collaboration platform for research institutes, 
government, and private sector (Malta).
 	Identify fields where the country has strong presence and 
further encourage progress, collaboration at the national level, 
and extroversion (Belgium, Portugal).
 	Incentivize collaboration with the industry for conducting basic 
and applied research (UK, Japan).
 	Call for AI research proposals in specialised areas such as 
explainability, learning from small datasets, AI alignment, and 
AI creativity (Singapore) among others.
 	Launch programme to support junior researchers (Germany)
 	Increase investment in AI research (basic and applied) and 
create dedicated AI research funding program as well as AI-
related research commercialization programs (Malta).
 	Develop collaborative R&D networks in AI with other countries 
(i.e., Franco-German R&D network).

Education, 
Talent 
Development & 
Retention
 	Increase the number of MSc and PhD graduates specializing in 
AI and data science (i.e., Estonia) and fund industry-oriented 
PhDs and post-docs (EU).
 	Create and support academic programmes in English (Portugal, 
Malta).
 	Launch new AI educational programs across levels 
(postgraduate, MSc, PhD) (Malta, Denmark, Estonia, Japan, 
Czech Republic, among others).
 	Introduce remuneration incentives (monetary and non-cash 
compensation) and residency policies to attract international 
AI talent (Finland Talent Boost program), support the return of 
nationals working abroad (i.e., Czech Republic).
 	Utilise a dedicated card system to attract and retain AI 
professionals and entrepreneurs in Europe (EU).

Skills & Future of 
Work 
 	Incorporate more STEM, including AI in primary-to-undergrad 
curriculum (i.e., Estonia).
 	Foster AI education using dedicated platforms ('Teach-and-
learn AI' platform-Germany).
 	Increase reskilling/training programs for workers, across the 
private and public sector, and transform life-long learning 
including sensitive groups so as to increase AI relevant skills.
 	Develop training program on application of AI for business 
leaders (Estonia).
 	Supplement and renew competences of the adult population 
by providing online courses, opening up university courses to 
all interested parties and introduce learning vouchers for every 
adult of working age (Finland). 
 	Provide tools for identifying and covering skill gaps within 
companies (Ireland).
AI for Economic 
Growth and 
Digital 
Transformation
Private Sector

 	Establish National AI Digital Innovation Hub(s) to connect 
companies to AI expertise. 
 	Foster an AI innovation ecosystem, establish AI startup 
incubation and innovation hubs (India, Lithuania).
 	Strengthen and expand technology transfer structure 
(Germany).
 	Launch innovation competitions to fund up AI-projects utilizing 
governmental datasets as well as pilot AI product development 
 	AI projects with high technology readiness levels (i.e., Estonia).
 	Develop a National AI Marketplace (India).
 	Establish world reference testing facilities with possibility of 
regulatory sandboxes (i.e., EU) as well as 'living labs' for 
technologies and business models (Germany).
 	Establish investment pools, leveraging public and private funds 
to support AI companies (i.e., Denmark), Centres, and fund 
national champions (France).
 	Provide funding for joint business-academic collaborations to 
create pilot AI applications (Germany).

Public Sector

 	Pilot AI-based solutions in public sector.
 	Create awareness around the implementation of practical AI 
applications in the public sector (i.e., Estonia).
 	Establish AI Public-Private Partnership (PPP) and associated 
platforms to facilitate data sharing of public data assets among 
others (i.e., Netherlands).
 	Create technological sandboxes to test and develop public 
sector AI applications as well as public code repositories (i.e., 
Estonia).	
 	Test AI-enabled public services and solutions through Digital 
Innovation Hubs (EU) for a number of public sector areas in 
collaboration with regions and municipalities (i.e., Denmark).
 	Create Chief Data Officer positions in government ministries 
(Estonia) and educate policy makers about AI (India).
 	Incorporate AI technologies in civil services and particularly 
public communication to achieve personalization, 24/7 
availability.
AI Principles
Ethics
 	Contribute to the creation of international standards for 
ensuring ethical, responsible, and trustworthy use of AI. 
 	Establish guidelines and promote research on explainable, 
transparent AI systems and accountability as well as in 
relation to new privacy protection ways (Germany).   
 	Create tools, guidelines, and data-ethics label for businesses 
to responsibly use data (i.e., Denmark) and introduce tools for 
establishing checks for privacy, discrimination, and other 
aspects of ethical data usage (France).
 	Encourage and promote ethical-by-design applications 
(Belgium, France).
 	Establish multidisciplinary National Committees/Councils on 
Ethics so as to facilitate the creation of an ethical frameworks 
and codes for national AI projects. 
 	Ensure that all public algorithms are transparent and 
explainable (France).
 	Develop regulatory guidelines for AI applications to ensure 
public trust and uphold civil liberties, privacy, and American 
values (USA).
 	Examine the ethical implications of AI (AI & Society CIFAR 
program -Canada) and draw up additional guidelines for data 
ethics, transparency, security, and regulations.
 	Establish PhD program in social, economic, legal implications 
of AI.

Inclusion
 	Establish free AI training programs for citizens (i.e., Elements 
of AI - Finland) and pay particular attention to inclusion in AI 
training priorities and attract more women to AI studies (EU).
 	Support designs and tools that reduce bias and discrimination
 	Ensure that norms built into AI systems respect fundamental 
human rights, equality of citizens and the realisation of 
democracy (Finland) as well as fostering and adequately 
representing diversity as a guiding principle (Germany).
 	Government investment in companies that demonstrate non-
discriminatory AI (France).
 	A National AI observatory to monitor and assess the impact of 
AI on work and society (i.e., Germany) and monitor the AI 
related public conversations on social networks through 
technology (i.e., Italy).
 	Develop public feedback system for regulations (Finland, 
Lithuania).
 	Establish Digital Work and Society Future Fund to create 
nation-wide centre of excellence for overarching and inclusive 
measures in participatory social shaping of technology 
(Germany).			

Legal 
Framework
 	Foster a legal and regulatory environment to facilitate the 
uptake of AI (i.e., adapting or creating new AI legislation, 
regulatory frameworks, etc) as well as legal frameworks 
governing data use in AI applications and ensure use is in line 
with non-discrimination and right to privacy (Germany).
 	Revise legal liability frameworks to take into account cases 
where AI decisions are involved (Portugal).
 	Ensure personal privacy protection (France).
 	Set up regulatory sandboxes to test AI products.
 	Introduce a national AI certification framework (Malta). 
 	Examine how to monitor and audit usage of AI use in 
companies (Germany).
 	Revise or establish regulations for cybersecurity, minimum 
security and explainability thresholds for approving AI 
applications, etc. (Singapore, Japan, UK).
Table 1: Categorization of various AI Enablers in the three policy areas - Relevant Initiatives in the Strategies of different countries

2.3	NOTABLE STRATEGIES ACROSS THE 3 POLICY AREAS
2.3.1	NOTABLE STRATEGIES ACROSS POLICY AREA 1: AI ENABLERS 
2.3.1.1	DATA AND DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE  
The two core factors for promoting the development and application of AI are access to high-quality data and 
access to computational infrastructure of sufficient capacity for implementing, testing and providing such 
technologies.
Regarding data access, practical solutions that have been already adopted in various AI strategies include the 
creation of open data portals, such as the one already in development in Estonia, where governmental, civil 
and third-party data are provided under open access licenses and are annotated in terms of provenance, 
usage, etc. Most countries have committed to open their governmental data, while in many cases the adoption 
and development of standards has been recognised as an important aspect of data sharing, with funding 
directed to the support of data standards use and implementation (Germany, Luxembourg).
Of equal importance is the provision of toolkits, sandboxes and testbeds that will simultaneously serve as the 
means to provide readily usable technical assets, experimentation environments and repositories of solutions 
to be used more widely. These are organised in different ways, as - for example - services offered by local 
Digital Innovation Hubs (Finland), registries of domain-specific tools especially for language processing and 
usage of language resources (Denmark), and dedicated sandbox services (Finland, Lithuania, Malta).
In some countries, data sharing, and AI research and development has been faced holistically via the creation 
of national AI platforms that support the public and private sectors, academic and research institutions and 
collaborations between them. Notable examples are the Aurora AI (Finland), Slovak.AI (Slovakia) and AI 
Innovation (Sweden) platforms.
Regarding the acquisition and provision of computational infrastructures and in accordance with the 
innovation support and democratisation principles, an frequently adopted strategy is the development and 
deployment of secure cloud environments (Denmark), enhance the deployment of broadband connections for 
companies and households (Norway), incorporate AI toolkits in already running National cloud and 
supercomputing infrastructures (Serbia), and invest on the creation and expansion of such infrastructures 
(Spain).

2.3.1.2	RESEARCH 
Setting the environment for achieving advancements in AI Research generally one should move in two 
directions: build on and strengthen research fields where the country already has significant presence and 
results and facilitate and encourage collaboration and knowledge exchange with external research entities. 
There are multiple approaches proposed for achieving progress in both directions, focusing on curricula 
redesign at all educational levels and particularly higher education (Estonia), create and support regional 
Centres of Knowledge and Excellence (Germany), and support joint large-scale initiatives between the centres 
(France). As multiple national strategies stress, it is important to review and prioritise subdomains where the 
country has already shown strong results and has built strong collaborations and networks (Portugal, 
Netherlands, Luxembourg), and accordingly direct efforts and funding. Digital infrastructures for the effective 
sharing of knowledge, assets and outcomes are also crucial for facilitating research, and can be achieved by 
encouraging the usage of European tools (e.g., OpenAIRE) and building similar smaller-scale and more flexible 
frameworks at the country level.
Funding is of course a crucial aspect of promoting research, and the majority of established strategies 
emphasise the need to collaborate with the industry. This can be pursued by co-funding research departments 
in companies (Estonia), incentivise additional companies to undertake R&D (Malta), establish national 
programmes for the collaboration of academia and industry (Norway), etc.

2.3.1.3	EDUCATION & AI TALENT DEVELOPMENT & RETENTION
The three axes for a substantial talent pool in the country are related to talent development, talent attraction 
and talent retention. Given Greece's size, educational heritage and economic status, talent development and 
talent retention are more critical in the short- and mid-term, via educational/academic reforms and measures 
to mitigate brain-drain. However, due to its prominent role in Southeaster Europe, talent attraction is a very 
real and promising possibility. In conjunction with the establishment and extension of AI MSc and PhD 
programmes that are foreseen in most AI strategies, many countries propose tax and compensation incentives 
for retaining talent (Malta, Russia), while many propose further citizenship and residency policies to attract 
talent from abroad (Netherlands, Czech Republic, Russia) and the provision of repatriation incentives (Czech 
Republic).
Extroversion and thus further possibility to address international talent can also be assisted by the 
establishment of international collaborative programmes (Finland) and the organisation of higher-level 
educational programmes in English, a common strategy in non-English speaking countries (Czech Republic, 
Portugal, Malta).

2.3.1.4	SKILLS AND FUTURE OF WORK
There are many layers where a national strategy for the future of work should operate. A first consideration 
should be the reorganisation of basic and secondary education, where multiple countries will examine the 
introduction of AI-related courses and activities, starting from primary schools (Denmark, Luxembourg, 
Portugal, Serbia), with actions taking into account the young age of the students, the form of the broader 
curriculum, and the re-training of educators (Malta).
Reskilling and upskilling are naturally a major aspect to examine and organise. Most national strategies aim to 
launch nation-wide upskilling programs (UK, Germany, Malta), either via new initiatives or by opening-up 
university courses and establishing a certification strategy (Finland), or by organising e-courses and MOOCs 
(Norway, Portugal, Lithuania, India, among others). In-job training is also a priority, via the establishment of 
incentives for companies and business leaders to train themselves (Estonia) and their workforce (Luxembourg, 
Norway, Malta, Russia,) in AI as well as incorporate AI on their practices (US, Qatar).
Apart from the operational directions and given that the actual impact of AI in the future of work is largely still 
unobserved, actions to monitor and assess this impact are of note. Germany and India foresee the foundation 
of observatories and Task Forces for the task, in collaboration with Labour Ministries and the private sector.

2.3.2	NOTABLE STRATEGIES ACROSS POLICY AREA 2: AI APPLICATION AREAS
2.3.2.1	PRIVATE SECTOR 
Fostering innovation and growth in and through AI is an overarching goal of all national strategies. To support 
the goal, actions for funding, knowledge and technology transfer, an appropriate steering must be foreseen. 
National funding is a solution adopted in many cases either through new (Denmark, Portugal, Japan, UK, 
Luxembourg, Serbia, among others) or existing (Norway, Finland, Netherlands, Germany, Estonia) instruments, 
possibly recalibrating the latter to strengthen their AI focus. Co-investment with private funds and incentives 
for attracting such interest are also an important goal in many countries (Malta, Norway, UK, Russia among 
others).
Knowledge and technology transfer are fostered through the funding of joint industry-research applications or 
via the establishment and operation of DIHs, an instrument of extreme importance for all EU member states. 
The implementation of AI marketplaces is also a viable and promising option (Czech Republic, India) for sharing 
mature technical solutions to a broad range of companies of all sizes.
Depending on each country's strengths and priorities, AI innovation is also steered towards specific sectors of 
financial and civil/public interest (Sweden).

2.3.2.2	PUBLIC SECTOR 
The improvement of citizen-oriented services through the introduction of AI is a common theme across most 
national strategies. In some cases, such as Lithuania, AI solutions are promoted also for improving internal 
processes, like document and legislature searching (Netherlands). Nevertheless, there is some variation on the 
specific public sectors where emphasis and priority are given. For example, the management and usage of 
health data is seen as a priority in several countries (Norway, Malta, India, among others), while the 
development of chatbots for citizen-facing applications is considered in Sweden and Netherlands.
Competence building for civil servants and policy makers is also an important direction, with the organisation 
of seminars and courses in collaboration with academia (Norway, Denmark), the private consulting sector 
(Malta, India) or both (Netherlands).
Also of note are initiatives to fund and promote the development of services dedicated to the public sector, 
particularly from small, high-expertise companies (Estonia, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Czech Republic), 
the industry in general (Norway, Sweden), academia and research (Portugal, Estonia), and across public sector 
stakeholders (Denmark).

2.3.3	NOTABLE STRATEGIES ACROSS POLICY AREA 3: AI PRINCIPLES 
2.3.3.1	ETHICS 
Most national strategies foresee the foundation of relevant committees and councils to solidify ethical 
principles and create ethical frameworks for developing and using AI. In some cases, data generation, 
processing and usage are factors included in the responsibilities of such instruments (Denmark, Germany, UK). 
Denmark's and Malta's cases bear additional interest as their strategy proposes a labelling program for 
certifying adherence to the established ethical rules and ethics.
Promotion of ethical-by-design technology is also an important aspect, with countries aiming to fund and 
promote research on AI explainability and accountability (Germany, Lithuania, among others) often in 
collaboration with other disciplines (Finland), standardize testing and reporting processes (Netherlands), 
encourage openness and curation/documentation of algorithms (France), and support education and training 
on the topic (Estonia, Norway).
Establishing the mechanisms to receive and analyse citizen feedback on the impact of AI is also an interesting 
action included in several strategies (Finland, Norway, Serbia, Czech Republic among others).
Of note is also the fact that amongst EU countries and more broadly across Europe, an important tool to be 
used for forming and applying ethical rules for AI is the EC HLEG's Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI report.

2.3.3.2	INCLUSION 
Analogously with the dual manifestation of ethical aspects, technical and societal AI strategies handle inclusion 
issues by ensuring both that AI applications avoid bias and discrimination and that evolutions in AI usage 
benefit equally all citizens regardless of gender, ethnicity, and ability.
For the first branch, and in conjunction with the promotion of explainable AI, encouragement, and funding of 
research for bias reduction (France) and monitoring of the response of AI systems through relevant boards and 
reporting agencies (Germany, Finland) are important actions for ensuring inclusion and fair representation in 
automated systems.
Social actions span a wide gamut of initiatives, starting from the establishment of financial and organisational 
support measures for promoting diversity in AI research and workforce (France, Denmark). Such measures 
include the operation of dedicated councils (UK), collaboration with the private sector (US), and the 
mobilisation of international boards (Netherlands). Observatories (Germany), Public discussion forums and 
social media discussion groups (Italy) are important instruments for informing citizens and receiving their 
feedback.
In close collaboration with actions under skill development, the implementation of free or affordable training 
programs (Finland, Czech Republic) and Digital Inclusion informational workshops and communities (Portugal) 
will help diversification and alleviate digital exclusion phenomena.

2.3.3.3	LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK 
To ensure that AI evolution is led by and conforms to ethical principles, in line with national and international 
law, there is a need to reconsider and evaluate the sufficiency of present legislation with AI impact and, 
furthermore, aid AI innovators in their efforts to produce compliant solutions.
A widely adopted proposal (Norway, Malta, among others) is the creation of legal sandboxes, where 
companies and legislators can seek consultancy and assess their ideas in terms of compliance with legal and 
ethical standards. Tech and Law experts are to be invited as members of the committees governing and 
coordinating the dashboards, to bridge the two fields and facilitate communication.
An important aspect that is considered in the Dutch National Strategy is the evaluation of legislators. The 
Dutch approach, which focuses on the capacity of legislators to evaluate algorithms, can be extended to cover 
different issues regarding the impact of data usage, and many countries are concerned with the solidification 
of the regulatory framework for data privacy and discriminatory AI (Germany, France, Czech Republic).
An also interesting idea is the establishment of platforms for informing the public and acquiring citizen 
feedback (Finland).

2.4	LESSONS LEARNED ACROSS POLICY PILLARS
The various national strategies have similarities in the topics that they address and the priorities that they set 
across the three Policy Pillars, as it can be seen in the sections that follow: 
Policy Pillar I: AI Infrastructural Enablers 
*	Data & Digital Infrastructures: Data-centric focus based on the creation of data ecosystems, data models 
(data sharing, data exchanges), data partnerships and relevant policies (e.g., open data policies). Some of 
the strategies focus on the creation of National supporting infrastructures, and AI platforms for all 
stakeholders. In addition, special emphasis is placed on the creation of testing and experimentation 
facilities. 
*	Education, Talent Development & Retention: Education is a key aspect covering primary and secondary 
education (e.g., STEM), as well as tertiary education aiming to increase both the breadth of courses (e.g., 
specialised AI and Data science programmes, new programmes for diverse stakeholders and applied 
industry-focused programmes) and the number of graduates. Another critical AI enabler is talent 
development and retention. Strategic actions in this area aim to develop national talent while at the same 
time provide incentives and policies for national and international talent retention. 
*	Skills & Future of work: Emphasis is placed on cultivating skills across levels and increasing the 
reskilling/upskilling training activities on a lifelong basis, utilising dedicated platforms. Emphasis is placed 
on competency mapping and evolution, as well as on the skill gap identification 

Pillar II: AI Application Areas for Economic Growth
*	Private Sector: Fostering a strong national AI innovation ecosystem is a key aspect. Emphasis is placed on 
establishing National AI Digital Innovation Hubs (DIHs) to interconnect companies with expertise, fostering 
appropriate technology transfer structures, creating AI start-up innovation and incubation hubs and 
providing the necessary funds to support them utilising investment pools (private & public funds). Testing 
and experimentation for technologies and business models is a crucial component, with specialised 
sandboxes and living labs.  
*	Public Sector: Emphasis is placed on accelerating the adoption of AI both in optimising existing public 
sector services (e.g., public communication), but also in piloting novel AI solutions and services, utilising 
testing, and experimentation facilities such as sandboxes and DIHs. Another critical component relates to 
the creation of awareness around AI projects in the public sector and the provision of necessary training 
for public sector employees and policy makers. At an operational level, the provision for introducing 
relevant positions in ministries (e.g., chief data officers) is preferred by a number of countries. Finally, 
establishing Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) utilising specialised platforms for enhancing collaboration 
and data sharing among others is a key strategic action by several countries. 
 
Pillar III: AI Principles
*	Ethics: Emphasis is placed on multidisciplinary National Committees on Ethics. Creation of guidelines, 
frameworks, standards to ensure ethical, responsible, trustworthy use of AI and promote research in 
these areas for the private and public sector. The development of data-centric tools, guidelines, and data-
ethics labels. Finally, focus is placed on the ethical implications of AI and the promotion of research in 
multidisciplinary and cross-disciplinary AI areas. 

*	Inclusion: The design and development of free trainings for citizens is a key focal area. Emphasis is placed 
on the development of tools for reducing bias & discrimination, norms built into AI systems and the 
incentivisation of inclusive behaviour. The creation of a National AI observatory is a priority across 
countries. Finally, the need for participatory social shaping of technology and the introduction of public 
feedback systems is another key area.
*	Legal Framework: Emphasis is placed on the development of a legal and regulatory framework, that in 
some cases entails revision of existing legal frameworks (e.g., legal liability). Special emphasis is placed on 
personal privacy protection. The need for specialised testing and experimentation facilities, that will 
support for secure and trustworthy AI applications is another key area. Finally, focus is placed on 
monitoring and auditing AI.

2.5	STRATEGIC INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATIONS AND PRESENCE IN INTERNATIONAL AI 
INITIATIVES
The present strategy acknowledges the importance of a closer collaboration with other EU countries, as a 
catalyst for effective knowledge sharing, including adoption of international best practices. The development, 
adoption and use of AI solutions at national and EU level is a challenging and multi-facet task with significant 
social, economic, scientific, and technological implications. International collaboration is a key for learning 
from the experience of other countries and avoiding the pitfalls of poor decisions and implementations. In this 
context, Greece will pursue strategic collaborations with other EU countries and the UK. These strategic 
collaborations have a proven rationale as they built on Greece's past or on-going synergies with these 
countries in digital transformation projects. Furthermore, each of the targeted collaborations is driven by a 
focused strategic agenda with well-defined targets that is likely to maximise their efficiency.

2.5.1	INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATIONS
Under the presented perspective Greece will actively pursue AI collaborations with the following countries:
*	France: Greece maintains close links with the Coordinators of the French National AI Strategy, who have 
contributed to earlier stages of the development of the present strategy. Greece intends to maintain and 
strengthen these links as part of the Strategy's implementation. The French AI strategy has a strong social 
component, which directly links with the social, ethical, and human activities of the Greek strategy. Thus, 
Greece plans to benefit from French experiences regarding the implementation of the social, human, and 
sustainability aspects of the French AI strategy.
*	Italy: In the scope of the European High-Performance Computing Joint Undertaking, Greece participates in 
the Italian-led LEONARDO initiative. The latter is the first EuroHPC Pre-Exascale Procurement Contract, 
which will be one of the top five supercomputers in the world. Driven by this participation, Greece plans 
to establish a close collaboration with Italy on Supercomputing issues, with emphasis on ensuring access 
to the computing power needed to support a vibrant AI ecosystem in Greece. 
*	Estonia: The accelerated digital transformation of Greece during the last couple of years is partly inspired 
by the Estonian digital transformation model and by the overall digital maturity of the country. There are 
frequent and substantial interactions between the two countries on digital transformation issues. The 
main goal of these interactions is technology transfer. In this context, Greece will pursue a strategic 
collaboration with Estonia regarding the development of technological infrastructures, which will cover AI 
among other technologies.
*	Finland: Finland is renowned for its successful educational system, which is considered a best practice 
model. Greece aims at collaborating with Finland on AI-related educational reform and training issues. As 
a first step Greece will consider the adoption and use of Finland's free AI course 
(https://www.elementsofai.com/), including its localisation in the Greek language.
*	UK: The establishment of Greece's governmental portal for digital services (gov.gr) has been strongly 
influenced by the respective UK initiative i.e., the gov.uk public sector information website. During the last 
couple of years, several knowledge transfer meetings have taken place between digital governance 
officials and experts of the two countries. Despite the anticipated BREXIT, Greece aspires to continue this 
collaboration on digital transformation, while expanding it in the AI space.
Table 2 provides an overview of these strategic collaborations with other countries, along with their 
background and rationale. 
Strategic 
Collaborator 
Area of Collaboration
Background & Basis of the Collaboration
France
Social and Human Issues
-Collaboration with the Coordinators of the French National AI 
Strategy in the scope of the development of the Greek 
Strategy
-The French AI Strategy puts significant emphasis on the 
social, human and sustainability issues, which are at the top of 
Greece's Strategic Agenda for AI.
Italy
High Performance 
Computing (HPC)
Greece's on-going and active participation in the LEONARDO 
EuroHPC Pre-Exascale supercomputer
Estonia
AI Infrastructures and 
Public Sector Adoption 
Estonia and Greece collaboration in the exchange of technical 
knowledge on digital transformation, which can be extended 
in AI.
UK
AI-based Digital 
Transformation of the 
Public and Private Sector 
Greece has benefit from transfer of knowhow and expertise 
from UK organisations in the establishment of the Gov.gr 
portal and the structuring of public sector digital services 
there-in 
Finland
Training and Education
Collaboration on education reforms for AI and potential 
replication or use of Finland's free courses for AI (e.g., 
https://www.elementsofai.com/) 
Table 2: List of International Strategic Collaborations to be Pursued by Greece as part of the AI strategy

2.5.2	PARTICIPATION IN INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVES AND CONSULTATION BODIES
In conjunction with the establishment of international collaborations, an important factor for the evolution 
and implementation of the strategy is the country's presence in initiatives and actions that will contribute to 
the formulation of the global AI landscape. Greece's aspiration to lead in the democratisation of AI will be 
greatly facilitated by its active involvement in projects, partnerships and actions driven by the Berlin 
Declaration on Digital Society [Berlin20]. The Declaration's main goals of promoting fundamental rights and 
democratic values, enhance participation and inclusion, and promote human-centric AI systems are strongly 
aligned with Greek priorities, thus all stakeholders involved in the strategy's implementations should pursue 
and foster collaborations under the settings of the Berlin Declaration.
Similarly, various Strategic Targets will be served via knowledge and technology exchange in the context of 
global alliances such as the Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI) , with explicit focus on the 
development and promotion of Trustworthy AI solutions. Started as a G7 initiative, GPAI is expanding to 
additional countries with EU member states already having a strong presence in the Partnership. The 
exploitation of already established research collaborations and their expansion via the Partnership will have a 
strong impact in the steering of research and technical directions.



 
3.	VISION & GOVERNANCE
3.1	 OVERVIEW OF GREECE'S AI VISION
Democratising AI: towards a technology-enabled future 
that is more democratic, just, equitable and sustainable for all and for good. 

Artificial Intelligence (AI) advances at a rapid pace. It will enable and will significantly disrupt virtually every 
facet of life. As a general-purpose technology it will realise tremendous benefits for economic growth and 
prosperity for our societies and our planet. It has the potential to solve a wide range of societal, health and 
environmental challenges, and bring about significant positive changes in work and society. At the same time, 
AI entails numerous potential risks related to discrimination, intrusion, individual and collective social harms, 
and loss of liberty and autonomy, among others. However, the ability of AI to realise its full potential, depends 
on the way that we will choose to seize this opportunity and address the challenges of this technological 
revolution, that are far more human, like rights, values, ethics, and governance, as societies and global 
community.
Recognising the importance and the potential of AI as well as the possible challenges and risks, Greece aims to 
foster a technology-enabled future that embraces responsible AI innovation that respects and promotes the 
rights, freedoms, democratic values and welfare of humans and nature at all times. Towards this aim, Greece 
will harness the opportunity of Artificial Intelligence for economic, social, environmental growth and 
prosperity, based on a value-centric sustainable approach, promoting the development and deployment of AI 
in a trustworthy, democratised, and sustainable way for all, and for the shared common good.  
The exploitation of an ethical and democratic AI for economic growth and for more effective digitization of the 
public administration are two of the core goals of the strategy, destined to benefit the country and its citizens. 
Beyond these important targets, Greece sets the goal of becoming an active and prominent contributor to 
democratizing AI at EU level, through engaging in relevant technology development, policy incubation, and 
standardization. To pursue its AI democratization goals, Greece sets more visionary targets in this area. 

The Vision for Greece
"Pursuing an AI advantage by innovating on our core values, which constitute our shared European values, the 
values and moral ideals of Democracy"
Values and moral ideals become more relevant in the AI era, as we are confronted with overwhelming 
negative changes in security, economic, political, health and environmental affairs. An era where more than 
ever before, we need to protect and promote the freedoms, rights, interests, values and welfare of humans 
and nature. As such, for Artificial Intelligence to become a promise of good for all and not a threat for our 
current and future societies, we need to rely on our shared principles and values.
Why do values matter?
Values define who we are. They are the trails of our common legacy, our collective memory, the way we 
think about ourselves and others. Morality may be an individual construct, as each person has a unique life 
trait, a unique set of experiences, and an individual history that has formed their existence, personality, 
code of ethics, and the tools to interpret the world. However, it provides a "moral compass" that can drive 
individual actions and decisions, providing context like what is "good" and "bad", what is "fair" or "unjust", 
what is "right" and what is "wrong". Artificial Intelligence lacks such a compass: AI actions and decisions are 
solely based on data. Therefore, the "moral compass" element must be infused externally, as an extrinsic 
process, an Ethos-in-AI acting as a moral compass for AI. Greece aims to contribute to this value-centric 
approach to steering the design, development and deployment of AI that respects and promotes rights, 
freedoms and our shared values.

The vision is for Greece to become one of world's top experimental laboratories for the sustainable 
democratisation of AI and the infusion of AI with the rights, freedoms, and values of democracy by design.
Greece aims at:
*	Democratising AI and placing it at the service of people, society, and the environment, while accelerating 
the design, development and deployment of responsible, inclusive, democratic AI-driven innovation that is 
social- and environmentally friendly AI-driven innovation and
*	Embedding the moral ideals, values, and rights of Democracy in AI by design (democratic AI-by-design)
Creating this way, the necessary conditions for the development and the deployment of AI in a trustworthy, 
democratised, and responsible way, that embeds the rights, freedoms, moral ideals, and values of Democracy 
in AI by design.  AI by design will be a catalyst for the creation of trust, which will greatly support the 
accelerated adoption of AI solutions by governmental and industrial organizations. In this way, the 
democratization pillar of the strategy will reinforce the economic development and digital transformation 
targets of the strategy as well.
For these aims to be realised it is important to democratise, not only AI knowledge, skills, tools, data and 
digital infrastructures, required to build AI systems, but also the AI design, development lifecycle and 
experimentation processes. However, to maximise AI's benefits for humans and nature it is necessary to create 
and embed the fundamental rights, freedoms and democratic values in AI, complementing the European 
principles for Trustworthy AI. Creating this way, a future AI society where values, rights, and freedoms, 
continuously inform technological development as they are infused in AI by design. 
Greece intends to create a relevant socio-economic and technological environment for its own country.  
However, it also aims at playing an active role in relevant technological developments, policy making and 
standardization at EU level. In this direction, the strategy prescribes several pioneering projects that address 
technological, policy and regulatory developments in an integrated way.  

Why democratic values?
Democracy is not just a political process, but a moral ideal that is built on faith in human nature and the 
possibilities of human nature. Democracy is a system of fundamental rights individual rights, group action 
rights, freedom of intellectual, ideological, and political movements, the rights of political organisations and 
participation, and the rights of social protection. It is a system of fundamental values and virtues; an open, 
distributed, participatory and collective intelligence system - through open social inquiry and social intelligence 
towards solving social problems. Democracy is a system that has the potential and ability to be self-correcting 
and self-renewing through education and social interaction.
These democratic ideals are encapsulated in the notion of 'democratic ethos'. Ethos means 'virtue' in the 
Aristotelian sense and denotes the internal values that characterise an individual. Democratic ethos 
encompasses guiding moral ideals, the fundamental values and virtues of Democracy itself. It depicts a set of 
values, rights, virtues and commitments embraced by members of a community who are committed to a 
flourishing Democracy; values that can act as a moral code for AI.
Democratic Ethos in AI-by-design calls for the moral ideals and fundamental rights of democracy to be taken 
into account throughout the whole engineering process of AI, as well as the methods that can subsequently 
verify and assure that an intelligent agent's conduct and use remain within these moral and democratic 
bounds [NCSRD20].
Democratic AI entails that this approach should be considered when creating and evaluating AI technology and 
AI systems. An approach that necessitates that by default, democratic ethos is incorporated into AI technology 
and AI systems. It acts as a trust-mark denoting that AI technology is designed with the fundamental rights, 
freedoms, democratic values and trustworthy AI principles as a priority, together with the purposes that each 
system serves.
As an experimental laboratory for the sustainable AI democratising, Greece will stimulate AI-driven innovation 
with democratic ethos, respectful of the rights, freedoms and European principles for Trustworthy AI. Towards 
this aim, an AI culture and an inclusive AI empowered social infrastructure will be fostered in order to enhance 
the adoption and become a value co-creator of responsible, democratic AI innovation. This will be supported 
with the creation of testbeds and sandboxes for inclusive AI experimentation across technological, regulatory, 
business, ethical and democratic components of AI systems. The necessary incentives will also be provided in 
order to nurture such a participatory co-creation of value, anchored upon the needs of people, society and the 
environment. The experimentation outputs will provide evidence-based findings that will enrich the design of 
future AI-driven innovations as well as research and policy actions.
This value-centric democratic and democratised approach to AI that respects and promotes rights, freedoms 
and our shared values could serve as an example of a good practice for EU and the world.

3.1.1	GOALS
Greece's visionary democratization targets will contribute to the ever-important economic growth and public 
sector transformation goals of the strategy. Specifically, AI-by design will become a catalyst for fostering trust 
between the various stakeholders including citizens, private sector enterprises and the public administration. 
At the same time, Greece's active participation in the developments of an ethical and democratic AI at EU 
scale is expected to contribute to improving the positive economic outputs for the country. Demand for 
technologies, policies, and standards for ethical and trusted AI is expected to increase in the coming years. 
Greece can serve as a provider of value-added services in this area, including provider of knowhow, expertise, 
technologies, and policy-related best practices.
Our main AI "democratization" goals to reach between 2021 and 2030 are set out in the following table, and 
will be achieved through a set of specific strategic targets and actions detailed in the following chapters. An 
agile, iterative "test and learn" approach will be utilised in order to realise the envisioned benefits in the most 
efficient way.
The aspirational vision for Greece, is the longer-term outlook that aims to create a technology-enabled future 
and an AI society that is more democratic, just, equitable and sustainable for all and for the common good. 
The corresponding vision addresses three key AI policy areas, AI infrastructural enablers, AI application areas 
and AI principles.
 
Figure 2: Short-Term, Medium-Term and Long-Term Targets of the Strategy Regarding AI Democratization  
 
Short-term
Medium-term
Long-term
AI 
Infrastructural
Enablers
Lay the foundations and AI 
enablers, democratise 
knowledge, skills, tools, 
data and infrastructure, 
and enable the creation of 
AI innovation ecosystem 
Strengthen the 
foundational AI enablers, 
further enhance the AI 
democratisation & nurture 
the AI innovation 
ecosystem
Scale-up AI infrastructural 
enablers, increase AI 
democratisation, accelerate 
& sustain the AI-innovation 
ecosystem
AI Application
Areas
Experiment with a set of 
pilot flagship AI projects 
for the public and private 
sector
Augment AI 
experimentation, expand 
successful AI activities, 
pilot new projects across 
the private and public 
sector
Democratise AI 
experimentation across the 
public and private sector & 
scale-up AI projects and 
pilots across sectors
AI Principles
Set the basis for ethical, 
trustworthy, and 
democratised AI, and lay 
the foundations for 
sustainable AI 
democratisation 
(economic, social, 
environmental 
parameters)
Strengthen ethical, 
trustworthy and 
democratic AI frameworks, 
toolkits and labels in 
collaboration with 
European and international 
liked minded nations
Transform via the 
sustainable 
democratisation of AI that 
is infused with the rights, 
freedoms and values of 
democracy - "towards a 
value-driven, democratic AI 
society"
Table 3: Main goals of the Visionary "Democratization" Pillar of Greece's Strategy in the Period 2021 - 2030 (Short, Medium, Long 
Term)
3.1.2	REMOVING BARRIERS
In order to realise the full potential of AI in Greece, it is important to address the challenges that emerge in a 
number of areas. 
*	Need for an ethical, trustworthy and democratic framework for artificial intelligence: Aligned with the 
Berlin Declaration, "we need a compass to navigate the digital transition, aligned by our common 
European fundamental rights and values and shaped by participatory processes that to some extent may 
themselves need to be redesigned by involving citizens and the general public in open consultations, 
online and offline". Thus, fostering the right frameworks to ensure participatory, ethical, trustworthy, and 
democratic AI is crucial. 
*	Need for data quality and quantity for artificial intelligence: Demand for more and good quality data to 
train algorithms, is increasing. Inability to find data, constitutes a barrier to developing AI solutions that 
use for example the Greek language. 
*	Need for multidisciplinary AI related skills: To deliver the potential of AI, there is a need for specialised 
skill as well as better combination of business and technical skills. Both public and private organisations, 
regardless of their size will not be able to realise AI's full potential, unless they invest in their skills capital 
(upskilling, reskilling). In addition, creating a life-long skill development culture is also important for 
individuals and civil society at large so as to make AI's capabilities an inherent component of our work and 
life, now and in the future.   
*	Need to create trust: Enhancing AI adoption means that AI needs to be trusted and be ethical by design 
respecting fundamental rights, freedoms and democratic values. Trust in AI involves all stakeholder 
segments from people, to organisations, to public sector administrations and society at large. Building 
trust in AI implies the creation of the necessary conditions that will ensure full confidence in the 
protection of data, rights, freedoms, and values as well as the processes that will enable transparent, 
explainable, and accountable AI innovation
*	Need for higher level of investment: Greece ranks lower, in comparison to other countries with regard to 
private investment in artificial intelligence. This means that we need to exploit the country's digital 
transformation momentum and notable private investments in AI; and strengthening existing reforms and 
explore emerging models of public private partnership in order to accelerate the private investments in AI. 

3.2	STRATEGIC PILLARS 
The Strategy includes three key Policy Areas (Figure 3) that are important for realising our Strategic Vision and 
boosting adoption, innovation, and investment. These areas are sub-divided into six Strategic Targets: 
1.	Policy Area I: AI Enabling Framework. Including computing & data Infrastructures (Strategic Target 1), 
Research, Education, Skills Capital initiatives (Strategic Target 2), and the nourishment and support of 
the National AI Innovation ecosystem (Strategic Target 3). 
2.	Policy Area II: AI for Economic Growth and Digital Transformation. Focusing on the Private sector 
(Strategic Target 4), and the Public sector (Strategic Target 5) digital transformation and growth. 
3.	Policy Area III: AI Principles. As an overarching third policy area that highlights the importance of 
applying and supporting by design ethical, trustworthy, and democratic AI, respecting the rights, 
freedoms, democratic values and promoting the welfare of humans and nature at all times (Strategic 
Target 6).
 
Figure 3: The Three Policy Areas
The three policy pillars aim to address the needs of all stakeholders (Table 1) such as the public and private 
sectors, the research and academic communities, civil society (including the natural environment) (adopting a 
quintuple helix model ).
Policy Areas
Stakeholders

Civil
Society
Private 
Sector
Public Sector
Research & 
Academia
I: AI Enabling Framework
*
*
*
*
1. AI Infrastructure 

*
*
*
2. Research, Education & Skills Capital
*
*
*
*
3. Innovation Ecosystem 
*
*
*
*
II: AI for Economic Growth and Digital 
Transformation
*
*
*
*
4. Private Sector
*
*

*
5. Public Sector 
*
*
*
*
III: AI Principles
*
*
*
*
6 Ethical, Trustworthy & Democratic AI for 
all 
*
*
*
*
Table 4: Policy Areas across Stakeholder Segments
3.2.1	STRATEGIC POLICY PILLAR I
Strategic Target 1: National AI Infrastructure
The first Strategic Target focuses on AI infrastructures integrating both technological (i.e., software, hardware, 
networks) and data elements. This Strategic Target focuses on developing cutting-edge AI infrastructural 
components that will support the development, deployment, and operation of AI technologies, applications, 
and solutions at a national level. It creates the digital enablers that will lay the foundations for fostering a 
strong AI ecosystem in Greece.

Strategic Target 2: AI Research, Education and Skills Capital
Strategic Target 2 integrates three distinct and interrelated focal areas: Research, Education, and Skills capital. 
A cross-cutting theme that traverses all areas concerns talent development, retention, and attraction. This 
Strategic Target aims to create a climate that encourages and supports knowledge enhancement, upskilling, 
and research excellence, with the ultimate aim to equip Greece with citizens, workers, and leaders who are 
able to foster a value-driven AI future that will take advantage of new technologies for the common good. 

Strategic Target 3: AI Innovation Ecosystem
A strong AI innovation ecosystem is a key enabling factor for economic and social growth. Strategic Target 3 
aims to foster the creation of a sustainable and collaborative AI innovation ecosystem that will successfully 
interconnect all ecosystem stakeholders: entrepreneurs, innovators, investors, SMEs and large organisations, 
scientists, and research teams as well as regulators and policy makers and fuel AI-driven innovation that will 
benefit society as a whole. This Strategic Target will nurture the sustainable development of an inclusive and 
collaborative AI ecosystem in Greece. It will promote and facilitate the ability of Greek enterprises notably 
start-ups, to collaborate, develop and export globally competitive trustworthy AI products and services.

3.2.2	STRATEGIC POLICY PILLAR II
Strategic Target 4: AI for the Private Sector 
Strategic Target 4 aims to accelerate the adoption and use of AI in the private sector as an enabler of digital 
transformation and sustainable economic growth. This strategic target will increase the National AI and 
sectoral competitiveness (direct and indirect), drive an increase in GVA (Gross Value Added), and 
fundamentally facilitate the overall national digital transformation reforms. Aligned with our vision, the private 
sector will ensure that AI is placed at the service of the people, the society, and the environment, being 
democratic, trustworthy and sustainable for all for the shared common good.

Strategic Target 5: AI for the Public Sector 
This Strategic Target focuses upon the development and deployment of AI technologies and systems in the 
context of the public sector. Taking advantage of the country's significant digital transformation momentum, 
AI will become the catalyst for accelerating the on-going digital transformation and administrative reform. As 
such, it will accelerate the implementation of the rich portfolio of ambitious digital transformation projects 
while at the same time, streamlined with the wider digital strategy of the country, it will enable public sector 
organisations to automate, optimise and enhance their processes and operations, leading to best use of 
available resources. Furthermore, the public sector has a role-model function in adopting a value-based 
culture for AI systems development and deployment, which is ethical and democratic-by-design while at the 
same time socially-good- and environmentally-friendly-by-design.

3.2.3	STRATEGIC POLICY PILLAR III
Strategic Target 6: Ethical, Trustworthy and Democratic AI for all 
The aim of this Strategic Target is to lay the foundations for ethical, trustworthy, and democratic AI, respecting 
the rights, freedoms, democratic values and promoting the welfare of humans and nature at all times. This 
Strategic will promote and enable the development and deployment of AI that is infused with the human 
rights, freedoms, and values of Democracy, and the welfare of humans and nature (socially-good-by-design 
and environmentally-friendly-by-design), while establishing the necessary frameworks for assessing and 
auditing AI systems (legal, ethical & democratic AI frameworks).

3.3	IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY AND GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE 
A robust implementation framework and a well-defined yet flexible governance structure is crucial for 
ensuring the timely realisation and effective adaptation of the aforementioned strategic targets.
To this end, a participatory, iterative, and agile approach will be adopted. The approach will entail cross-
functional implementation, rapid iterations, and continuous, collective feedback loops, allowing us to gain 
insight and stakeholder feedback from the implementation of the initial AI Strategic Actions across all Strategic 
Targets. This process will enable the country to quickly move forward - leapfrog- and facilitate evidence-based 
decision making for planning its long-term AI action plan.
 
Figure 4: Implementation Strategy Lifecycle
At the Strategy Implementation level, the main decision and organization body of the National AI Strategy is 
the Supervising Committee, which will be responsible for coordinating and monitoring the actions designed in 
the context of the Programmatic Agreement. The Committee is composed of two representatives of the 
Ministry of Digital Governance and one representative (and their deputies) of each partner organisation. The 
Supervising Committee is responsible for the assembly and communication of an Expert Advisory Board, 
initially comprising nine global experts on domains and sectors relevant to the strategy. The Board will review 
progress on individual actions and projects, as well as the overall development of the strategy, and propose 
corrective/mitigative/future actions to the Supervising Committee.
At the Project Implementation level, the Supervising Committee will assemble Working Groups for the 
implementation of specific actions and projects. The responsibilities of each group are limited within the 
respective project and their mission is fulfilled with the project's completion. Working Groups are also assisted 
by the relevant Working Group for Artificial Intelligence of the Ministry of Digital Governance.
All decision and implementation bodies will be in close collaboration with the supporting instruments of the 
National AI Strategy, namely:
*	The Hellenic AI Observatory that will be developed to facilitate value-adding interactions with Greek 
stakeholders and AI communities. The Observatory will provide information about: (i) the AI activities in 
Greece, (ii) the AI ecosystem entities, (iii) the available AI training and educational activities that take 
place in Greece across all educational levels, including executive and public educational programmes, (iv) 
the AI research activities that take place in Greece in collaboration with various Greek Research Institutes, 
Universities, and the Hellenic AI Society (EETN), (v) AI success stories across different sectors (AI pioneers).
*	The National AI Auditing Body that will provide the requirements and audit the trustworthiness of AI 
systems, as well as their compliance with the necessary ethical and legal principles. It will act as the 
national advisory committee on the development and implementation of artificial intelligence and will 
provide the required mechanisms to establish broad policy and legal principles for AI. The government can 
get advice on ways to optimize the development of artificial intelligence, to support the unbiased 
development and application of artificial intelligence, and to protect the fundamental rights, freedoms, 
and democratic values.
*	The AI Politeia, a national, independent initiative that will act as an open, multi-disciplinary think tank and 
thought leadership body aiming to foster a co-creation environment and establish a global dialogue 
around Trustworthy and Democratic AI. Recognising the importance and potential of AI, as well as the 
possible challenges and risks, the potential implications for society (impact on human rights, people's lives 
and our democratic values) and the natural environment the AI Politeia will aim to foster a value-driven 
technology-enabled future that embraces responsible AI innovation for the benefit of all.
Details on the role of the above instruments are provided on the descriptions of the respective actions' 
projects foreseen in the Strategy.
Further guidance and knowledge exchange mechanisms will be established with the relevant Sectoral Scientific 
Councils of the National Council for Research, Technology and Innovation, and particularly the Council for Data 
Policy & AI. Scientific Councils support in specialised scientific domains the National Council, the Supreme 
Consultation Body of the Greek State for Research and Innovation.
 
Figure 5: Governance structure of the National AI Strategy
Figure 5 summarizes the governance structure and the communication workflows for the implementation of 
the strategy.
As the National Strategy is implemented and monitored by the aforementioned Implementation and 
Governance structure, and the local and global AI landscape evolves, the Strategy itself will be re-evaluated 
and possibly re-calibrated to incorporate changes and corrective actions. These will be applied by the 
Supervising Committee after consultation with all participating bodies and under the guidance of an Inter-
ministerial Committee.


 
4.	STRATEGIC TARGET 1 (ST1): NATIONAL AI INFRASTRUCTURES
4.1	OVERVIEW
4.1.1	RATIONALE AND IMPORTANCE OF ST1
AI infrastructures refer to both technological elements (i.e., software, hardware, networks) and data. 
Developing cutting-edge AI infrastructures is instrumental for supporting the development, deployment, and 
operation of AI technologies, applications, and solutions for Greek organizations. The development of a strong 
AI ecosystem is highly dependent on the availability of mature AI infrastructures. AI infrastructures include:
*	Data Economies: Data fuels AI applications, and AI makes data actionable.  The transition to a data 
economy is a key prerequisite for establishing a vibrant national AI ecosystem. The European Strategy on 
Data identifies data as an essential resource for economic growth, competitiveness, innovation, job 
creation and societal progress. Moreover, Greece's Digital Bible identifies as one of the priorities the 
specification and implementation of a national policy for data management. 
*	Cloud Infrastructures and Supercomputing: Cloud technologies, and in particular supercomputing, allow 
organizations to store, process and analyse data at scale, enabling elastic and efficient sharing and use of 
resources.
*	Networking Infrastructures: Networking, and in particular 5G, allows data collection 24/7 and enables 
distributed AI applications across the entire edge-to-cloud continuum. While currently most of the data 
processing and analysis takes place within data centres, we are witnessing an increasing shift to more data 
being processed at the edge of the network in smart connected devices and machines.
*	Cybersecurity: Disruptive technologies such as AI and digital transformation exposes us to new threats 
and vulnerabilities that can be exploited by cyber-attacks. Cybersecurity for AI Infrastructures comes with 
three aspects and objectives: increase security and protection of data and networks connected to AI 
infrastructures as well as resilience against cyber and hybrid attacks, assess the threat caused by malicious 
and adversarial AI and mitigate against them and finally benefit from the use of AI in enhancing security 
measures.

4.2	OVERVIEW OF EXISTING AI-RELATED INFRASTRUCTURES AT A NATIONAL LEVEL
Greece has developed various infrastructures which are related to AI and can support the development of a 
national AI ecosystem in the next years, leveraging also the opportunities created by recent efforts and 
initiatives, such as the Bible for Greece's Digital Transformation. In the following, we provide a brief overview.
*	Data infrastructures. A central catalogue for public open data of the Greek government has been setup 
(data.gov.gr), comprising over 10,400 datasets from 340 public organizations. Public sector organizations 
are continuously making available open datasets, according to national law 4305/2014 which mandates 
that open governmental datasets should be available to citizens in-line with FAIR information practices. 
Moreover, the "Diavgeia" platform (diavgeia.gov.gr) has been developed as part of the "Transparency 
Program initiative", which obliges all government institutions to upload their acts and decisions on the 
Internet, with special attention to issues of national security and sensitive personal data. Other initiatives 
include registries and data catalogues maintained by various authorities, such as the Hellenic Statistical 
Authority (ELSTAT), the Hellenic Manpower Employment Organization (OAED), the National Social Security 
Entity (EFKA), the General Electronic Commercial Registry (G.E.MI.), the e-Prescription service by IDIKA SA, 
etc. Data catalogues and repositories for geospatial and scientific data have also been developed (e.g., 
geodata.gov.gr, hellenicdataservice.gr). Finally, gov.gr is Greece's public sector information website, 
providing a single point of access to the full range of Digital Services of the Greek Government.
*	Cloud infrastructures. All e-platforms run by state services and agencies are gradually moved to the 
country's government cloud (G-Cloud) infrastructure. The migration of legacy applications to the central 
infrastructure of the G-Cloud, which is managed by the General Secretariat for Public Administration 
Information Systems (GSISPA), is on-going. Public sector databases are also migrated to the GSISPA data 
centres and a data consolidation policy is implemented. The migration is supported by relevant national 
legislation (law 4623/2019). GRNET offers the Okeanos Public Cloud, which comprises over 400,000 Virtual 
Machines spawned, as well as four Data Centres. Moreover, GRNET provides high performance computing 
resources to the Greek and international scientific and research communities to support them in their 
scientific research endeavours. These services are provided based on the ARIS supercomputing 
infrastructure, which already supports the development and deployment of various AI applications such as 
machine learning and deep learning-based applications. 
*	5G networks. The Greek legal framework for 5G has been defined and the respective legislation has been 
published (L. 4727/2020). Greece's National Telecommunications & Post Commission (EETT) has 
announced the auction of 5G wireless spectrum. Spectra across low, mid and high spectrum ranges are 
available in order to deliver widespread coverage and support all 5G use cases. The sale includes 
frequencies in the 700MHz, 2GHz, 3.4GHz-3.8GHz and 26GHz bands (L. 4727/2020). The Greek electronic 
communications market comprises 3 Mobile Network Operators (MNOs) that all offer 4-play services 
(mobile, fixed, broadband, TV). Vodafone and WIND Hellas have merged their Tower Businesses creating a 
tower infrastructure company in Greece under the Vodafone owned Vantage Towers platform. Moreover, 
the development and operation of public high speed broadband infrastructure in white rural areas 
through Public Private Partnership has been completed in 2019. Superfast Broadband (SFBB) and UltraFast 
Broadband is currently ongoing in order to establish a favorable environment for private investment in 5G.
*	Cybersecurity. The implementation of the National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) is undertaken by the 
National Cyber Security Authority which was recently created to bridge the organizational and 
coordinative gap among the stakeholders involved in cyberspace security in Greece, both in the public and 
private sector (ENISA Greek NCSS; L4577/2018). The National Computer Security Incident Response Team 
(CSIRT - Cyberdefense Unit of the Hellenic Ministry of Defence) has been established (L4577/2018). 
National AI Data Infrastructures cyber resilience are to be registered to and supported by the National 
CSIRT. Part of the Greek NCSS is the Identification and listing of operators of essential services. This should 
include AI-driven services and relevant data space operators. This is an action coordinated by the National 
Cyber Security Authority in collaboration with relevant stakeholders (L4577/2018 DIRECTIVE (EU) 
2016/1148).

4.3	OPPORTUNITIES & CHALLENGES FOR GREECE
Based on the existing landscape, as summarized above, we next outline several opportunities and challenges 
that arise with respect to the national AI infrastructures.
Data infrastructures: Over the past decade, several successful initiatives have been undertaken for creating 
open data catalogues for the public sector and the scientific community (e.g., data.gov.gr, geodata.gov.gr, 
HELIX). This ensures significant expertise and mature technologies for open data publishing, which creates 
opportunities for economies of scale and added value while avoiding duplication of effort and resources. In 
particular, Gov e-Health platforms (ePrescription by IDIKA SA) maintain valuable information that can be used 
to support decision making for national health policies and expand and improve the provision of national 
health services. Also, they can foster data-driven R&I activities, and further strengthen synergies between 
health insurance organisations, the Ministry of Health, and supervising authorities, while providing 
transparency and accountability not only to citizens but to all involved stakeholders. Finally, it is worth noting 
that Greek organizations (e.g., University of Athens, ATHENA RC) have leading roles in EU-wide initiatives and 
projects related to open data and open science (e.g., OpenAIRE). Notably, ATHENA RC coordinates CLARIN:EL, 
the National Infrastructure for Language Resources and Technologies, which is the Greek part of the CLARIN 
ERIC European Infrastructure, a pan-European network of universities, research centres and institutions in this 
field. Still, to build precise and useful AI solutions, organizations not only need a lot of data, but also accurate 
data that is appropriately structured and labelled. Low-quality data typically lead to undesirable or unreliable 
outcomes. However, quality indicators for the published data are typically not available. Thus, technical 
challenges such as interoperability, data verification and provenance support, quality and accuracy, 
decentralised data sharing and processing architectures, and maturity and uptake of privacy-preserving 
technologies for big data will have a direct impact on the potential value of data made available for sharing. 
Moreover, beyond open data, a data economy also relies upon the availability of proprietary data owned by 
stakeholders in various value chains. There are however important business, organisational and legal 
constraints that can block this, such as the lack of motivation to share data due to ownership concerns; loss of 
control; lack of trust; the lack of foresight in not understanding the value of data or its sharing potential; the 
lack of data valuation standards in marketplaces; the legal blocks to the free flow of data and the uncertainty 
around data policies. There is a major barrier to the adoption of data sharing strategies and business models. 
Cloud infrastructures: GRNET's supercomputing infrastructure ARIS can serve as a basis for supporting the 
research and academic community in scaling-up their application development efforts, as part of Greece's 
National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence. There are already plans to expand the capacity of the existing 
supercomputing infrastructure, which should consider the need to support AI research and development. It is 
also worth noting that among the Okeanos data centres, the one in Louros area is managed based on green 
practices (i.e., it is a green data centre) as its operation leverages Renewable Energy Sources. This can serve as 
a best practice for the next generation of Green data centres that will support AI applications. Moreover, 
GRNET's Harmoni platform provides a concrete example of a large-scale database, which could serve as a basis 
for developing novel AI-based healthcare applications. G-Cloud also has the opportunity to become a one-
stop-shop to access raw (properly anonymized, etc) data that are produced by the deployed services. Greece 
can also benefit from access to Pan-European HPC infrastructures through its participation in relevant EU 
initiatives such as PRACE (through GRNET). Moreover, Greece has the unique opportunity to benefit from the 
strong presence of Greek HPC stakeholders (Institutions such as, GRNET, FORTH, NTUA, NCSR-D, AUTH in 
cooperation with Greek SMEs such as, Exapsys) in pan-European supercomputing initiatives with leading roles. 
For instance, the country participates in the EuroHPC Joint Undertaking, where its contributions to 
supercomputing research projects rank fifth among all European countries. As of the writing of this document, 
Greek HPC stakeholders participate in the following EuroHPC JU funded projects that either have started or 
have been selected to start: EuroCC National Competence Center, Leonardo, DEEP-SEA, RED-SEA, eProcessor, 
DComEX, ACROSS. The country has also a strong presence in other EU-funded HPC research activities, such as 
the European Processor Initiative, Exanest and EuroExa projects. Last but not least, Greek Supercomputing 
stakeholders (FORTH, NTUA), in collaboration with Greek HPC and AI SMEs (SunlightIO, Space Hellas) 
participate in European-wide Large-Scale Testbeds that bring together HPC and Big Data, such as the Evolve 
project. Ultimately, all these activities result in Greece's recognition as one of the top European countries in 
research and development in the technologies of Supercomputers and large Data Centres. 
Among the challenges to be tackled is that of "connecting" separate physical locations between the storage 
infrastructure of the data owners and the computing infrastructure that can be used for processing, taking into 
consideration that computing infrastructures need to have access to the required data. This challenge is both 
regulatory and technical. Another challenge stems from the fact that users of supercomputers typically 
develop their code in low level frameworks, whereas most data-driven applications depend on productivity-
oriented frameworks. Thus, the convergence with HPC requires the development of DevOps-friendly 
abstractions that abstract away the technical challenges of the use of supercomputers. From a hardware 
perspective, not only do production-ready chips need to be manufactured, but also a rich software ecosystem 
needs to be created around such chips to make them useful to developers of AI applications. Finally, compute 
infrastructures are known to operate at low utilization levels. The update of existing infrastructures with novel 
management software can yield lower costs both for compute platform operators and AI users.
5G networks. Infrastructure sharing in the 5G era across the MNOs will allow unleashing the business 
potentials for 5G. Infrastructure development and viable operation of 5G networks throughout the country 
can be accelerated. A 5G ecosystem can be created to promote new applications and innovative solutions for 
various sectors. As 5G becomes more widely implemented, the government will likely be forced to make policy 
and operational decisions that can shape the technological future. These decisions can indicate the 
acceleration of the public sector that will act as a key user of 5G services, in order to offer novel and advanced 
services to the citizens. Finally, WRC-23 will be an essential opportunity to improve 5G coverage, increase 
affordability through harmonisation and support growing data demand.
At the same time, the advent of 5G will be made with NSA 5G deployments, which will further delay the 
introduction of 5G SA. The promotion of 5G openness is still in its infancy since it requires 5G SA 
infrastructures and NPN-5G networks. Thus, investments are needed to facilitate the transition from 4G to 5G. 
The digitalization and integration of the public sector services should be accelerated. Also, EU Governments 
should engage in the WRC-23 process to ensure that sufficient mid- and low-band spectrum is made available 
for 5G.
Cybersecurity. Greece can benefit from the EU ongoing initiative for the creation of a cybersecurity 
competence network in conjunction with establishment of a national cybersecurity competence centre and 
network. A dedicated AI sub-domain can be set up, covering relevant data spaces, security, quality, 
trustworthiness, and reliability aspects. A mitigation plan and know-how on counter mechanisms with support 
from the National CSIRT needs to be established. Also, any fragmentation between different regional 
competence centres towards a national network needs to be addressed. Cooperation and coordination of 
actions between technical, operational and strategic stakeholders is required. Moreover, efficient handling of 
the "disruptive" effect of AI in Cybersecurity is needed.
Cyber-defence and National Defence: As a result of its geographical position, Greece has been always focused 
on having very strong National Defence, based on significant investments that represent a notably percentage 
of the country's GDP. AI represents an opportunity for strengthening National Defence, through injecting 
relevant innovations in the National Defence strategy. This is seen as a natural follow up of on-going activities, 
such as the close collaboration between the Ministry of Development and the Ministry of National Defence as 
part of the "THORAX" program. Specifically, the two Ministries have recently signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding, which is aimed at facilitating their strategic collaboration in research programs that will enable 
the Ministry of National Defence to benefit from data-driven tools and BigData analytics. In this context, AI can 
be a valuable add-on to National Defence infrastructures, going beyond Cyber-Defence and Cyber-Security, 
and helping the country to stay on the forefront defence innovation.

4.4	 ST1 ACTIONS PLAN
An agile approach should be used so as to allow Greece to gain initial feedback and insight from the 
implementation of some preliminary AI supporting projects. These projects will enable the country to move 
forward quickly and also utilise this knowledge for planning its long-term action plan for AI, due to having 
acquired a better understanding of the possibilities, benefits and risks of AI and its impacts. In particular, the 
fiscal situation of the country should be considered, which dictates a need to monitor and plan the use of 
infrastructures to prioritize needs and achieve economies of scale, avoiding the fragmentation and duplication 
of resources.

4.4.1	ACTION 1: CREATE AN AI INFRASTRUCTURES CATALOGUE
A directory integrated under the National Portal for AI (e.g., Greece.ai) should be established, offering a 
holistic view of available infrastructures, their use, maturity level and development plans. Available AI services 
for the public sector could also be listed as part of the Gov.gr services catalogue. Moreover, this could benefit 
from a national standards-based taxonomy of AI systems. AI comprises a wide range of different systems, such 
as industrial robots, robotic cells, software bots, machine learning systems, NLP systems, automated guided 
vehicles, and drones. To facilitate procurement and adoption of these systems by industrial enterprises it is 
recommended that a national taxonomy of AI systems is developed. Relevant activities are already undertaken 
by the General Secretariat for Industry.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST1.1: Create an AI infrastructures catalogue
Action Code: ST1.1
Key stakeholders: Government
Duration: 12 months
Indicative Milestones:
M6: Collect/update information about existing infrastructures to be included in the catalogue
M9: Design taxonomy
M12: Launch the catalogue
Links to other STs: ST5.1.1
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural
Indicative KPIs: Number of services covered by the catalogue
Table 5: Information about ST1.1 (Create an AI infrastructures catalogue)

4.4.2	ACTION 2: INCREASE OPEN DATA AVAILABILITY AND QUALITY
Continue and intensify efforts towards open data publishing and developing large national databases, 
including efforts for linking and fostering interoperability of systems and datasets that are currently siloed. 
Local and regional authorities should also aim at creating databases and making available open public datasets. 
In this direction, the development of data portals for cities and regions of the country should be encouraged. 
The central government (e.g., Hellenic Ministry of the Interior) could facilitate the development of open data 
portals by local governments, through providing guidelines, templates, and best practices for collecting, 
publishing, and managing data. Datasets of local and regional governments could be aggregated in a single 
catalogue (e.g., under data.gov.gr). Emphasis should be given on the fact that AI applications typically require 
high-quality data. This direction will also facilitate the development of AI Reference Projects and building AI 
Success Stories (see ST5.2).
In addition, companies tend to focus their AI efforts in areas where relevant and appropriate data are already 
available. They are often interested in using open data to enrich, complement or contextualize their own 
private datasets, but low-quality open data is often an obstacle in doing so. Therefore, data profiling and 
quality indicators should be applied to support and facilitate the discovery and assessment of appropriate data 
assets for AI applications. A part of data.gov.gr could be established as a catalogue of well-structured, high-
quality datasets for AI research, development and innovation. As described in ST2.1, such data infrastructures  
are particularly important for the research community and should be coupled with other activities focused  on 
improving data accessibility for researchers (see ST2.1.5). Furthermore, this could be extended towards a 
Public - Private data sharing framework (see ST4.4).
An appropriate machine-processable vocabulary should also be developed (probably extending as necessary 
existing EU efforts such as ADMS and contributing the extension upstream) for annotating datasets regarding 
their provenance, processing and re-distribution rights, validity period, and quality. This also links with Action 
4, as it would be beneficial to see the same vocabulary be generally used. Adoption by the Government can 
drive general adoption, so (a) Government agencies should be required to use this vocabulary to annotate the 
data assets they provide; (b) Government tenders should require that software procured by the Government 
processes metadata in this vocabulary where relevant. 
Finally, data use and re-use should be regulated by appropriate legal requirements and ethical principles, 
ensuring that it serves the public benefit, financial growth and societal well-being (see ST6.1.2).
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST1.2: Increase open data availability and quality
Action Code: ST1.2
Key stakeholders: Government
Duration: 18 months
Indicative Milestones:
- M6: Extend open data availability with respect to sectors and regions
- M18: Establish data profiling mechanisms and quality indicators to monitor and increase data and 
metadata quality
Links to other STs: ST4.4, ST5.2.3, ST6.1.2, ST2.1.5
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural, Legal/Regulatory
Indicative KPIs: Number of services covered by the catalogue
Table 6: Information about ST1.2 (Increase open data availability and quality)

4.4.3	ACTION 3: CREATE THEMATIC DATA REPOSITORIES
In addition to general-purpose open data catalogues (see Action 2 above), thematic data repositories should 
be established in key areas of high interest or importance. These could include: (a) A large-scale, distributed, 
medical imaging database at national level, through expanding the existing system of GRNET and NHS. This 
entails the expansion of the system to more hospitals, as well as the development of an infrastructure for 
sharing the data for medical, research and innovation purposes in-line with applicable laws and regulations.
The usage of common standards and cross-organization interoperability for data sharing across Greek 
healthcare organizations should be encouraged, while employing processes (e.g., anonymization, encryption) 
that guarantee privacy and protection of sensitive datasets. (b) A large-scale, distributed database of 
geospatial data, including Earth Observation data and data related to climate change, for enhancing high-value 
areas for the public and private sectors, such as maritime, agriculture, urban planning, transportation, logistics, 
etc., as well as contributing to the green transition and the realisation of the UN Sustainable Development 
Goals. Such thematic data repositories should also be accessible through the National Portal for AI.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST1.3: Create thematic data repositories
Action Code: ST1.3
Key stakeholders: Government
Duration: 36 months
Indicative Milestones:
- M6: Identify thematic areas and requirements
- M36: Launch thematic repositories
Links to other STs: ST4.4, ST2.5.1
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural
Indicative KPIs: Number of data repositories created
Table 7: Information about ST1.3 (Increase open data availability and quality) 

4.4.4	ACTION 4: CREATE PLATFORMS FOR INDUSTRIAL DATA MARKETS
Establish Data Brokers & Data Hubs for specific sectors of the Economy. Data brokers could facilitate the 
exchange of data across different enterprises. They can act as Trusted Third Parties that manage data 
contributed by various enterprises within a value chain or a private industrial network. This includes providing 
a legal framework for the operation and establishment of Data Brokers and incentivizing large enterprises and 
SMEs to create well-structured, high-quality datasets and to make them available to their partners and 
collaborators. Industrial data markets should include best practices, guidelines and tools for data 
anonymization. Best practices, guidelines and tools for synthetic data generation should also be taken into 
consideration. A match-making exercise where data providers and consumers declare offers and needs, and 
some pairs are selected to pilot the concept, using government infrastructure (e.g., GRNET) can help in this 
direction. This would allow potential private data brokers to evaluate market interest and have time to 
establish private infrastructures, where the data sharing activity can be transferred at the end of the 
subsidized period. Where appropriate, private data could also be combined with open data under a Public - 
Private data sharing framework (see ST4.4), e.g., to increase coverage. Data Brokers can also facilitate 
agreements between the business and research sectors as envisaged in ST2.1.5.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST1.4: Create platforms for industrial data markets
Action Code: ST1.4
Key stakeholders: Government, Private companies
Duration: 36 months
Indicative Milestones:
- M12: Identify and establish data brokers
- M36: Establish a platform for matchmaking between data providers and consumers
Links to other STs: ST4.4, ST5.1.3
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural & Legal/Regulatory
Indicative KPIs: Number of platforms created
Table 8: Information about ST1.4 (Create platforms for industrial data markets) 
4.4.5	ACTION 5: SETUP NATIONAL TESTBEDS FOR AI TESTING AND EXPERIMENTATION
Establish National Large-Scale Testbeds for supporting and facilitating the development of innovative AI 
applications (validations, trials, large-scale and small-scale experiments), powered by curated training data, AI 
algorithms and processing frameworks. Testbeds should provide advanced computing platforms with HPC 
capabilities that will be able to run complex Machine Learning algorithms on massive datasets in a sustainable 
way. Testbeds should also feature a rich Data Analytics processing stack that will cover the needs of most data 
processing pipelines, including both Data-in-Motion and Data-at-Rest pipelines. Testbeds should democratize 
the use of their resources through proper abstractions that will enable domain experts to express their logic 
and data assets through high level interfaces that will allow the ease of development, deployment, and 
maintenance of applications. Such a democratisation of these resources can boost the applicability and 
effectiveness of AI in a multitude of domains. For instance, manufacturing enterprises could benefit from AI 
testbeds comprising pilot production lines and laboratories. Also, the agriculture sector could benefit from 
field testbeds where AI technologies like drones and crop robots could be tested and validated, since the 
adoption and wider use of AI technologies in agriculture requires considerable investments in infrastructures 
like sensors, UAVs (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles), GIS (Geographical Information Systems) software, Satellite 
imagery, and AI enabled cameras. Such sector-specific testbeds should become accessible to enterprises, 
notably to SMEs that lack the resources needed to invest on AI adoption and innovation. They could be 
established by industrial associations (e.g., SEV) or even as part of private-public partnerships (see ST3.2 
regarding AI Testing and Experimentation Facilities). Furthermore, they should become connected to relevant 
national infrastructures such as super-computing testbeds, national databases, and Digital Innovation Hubs. In 
addition, these national testbeds should also be accessible to Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO) working 
on humanities, arts and social sciences to support the implementation of AI-based projects with high societal 
and cultural value (see ST6.13).
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST1.5: Setup National Testbeds for AI testing and experimentation
Action Code: ST1.5
Key stakeholders: Government, DIHs, Greek supercomputing institutes (FORTH, NTUA, GRNET), SMEs
Duration: 36 months
Indicative Milestones:
- M6: Identify national testbeds and requirements
- M36: Launch national testbeds
Links to other STs: ST3.2, ST6.13
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural
Indicative KPIs: Number of established testbeds, number of running pilots/Proof-of-Concept applications, 
performance improvements.
Table 9: Information about ST1.5 (Setup National Testbeds for AI testing and experimentation)

4.4.6	ACTION 6: EMPOWER CITIZEN-DRIVEN EXPERIMENTS
Create the infrastructure for the data equivalent of peer-to-peer microlending, where innovative applications 
require data and (possibly) manual annotation by potential users. Unlike the testbeds described above, this 
infrastructure is completely decentralised and "virtual datasets" are dynamically created by having individuals 
contribute (and revoke) access to specific data they personally own and manage. For instance, a mobility 
innovation could be piloted if thousands of early adopters agree to allow aggregative access to their mobility 
data, augmented with their own annotations regarding whether each datapoint regards business or leisure-
related mobility. Such infrastructure can support and facilitate AI-related citizen science (see ST2.2.1.4).
From a technical point of view, this can be based on initiatives such as Solid (solidproject.org) and MyData 
(mydata.org) to develop turn-key solutions offered as a service by infrastructure providers. Citizens will use 
such a service to store personal data and to personally decide on a case-by-case basis where they want to 
contribute data. The action should: (a) develop open-source software for both the server side and the client 
side, and especially for the client-side in multiple currently popular programming languages; (b) subsidise 
providers who want to host the server-side software to provide low-cost personal pods as a service; and (c) 
fund calls for projects that will develop and pilot innovative applications.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST1.6: Empower citizen-driven experiments
Action Code: ST1.6
Key stakeholders: SMEs, citizens (especially early adopters)
Duration: 36 months
Indicative Milestones:
- M6: Design platform for citizen-driven experiments
- M30: Launch platform
- M36: Launch calls for projects
Links to other STs: ST2.2.1.4, ST3, ST6
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural
Indicative KPIs: Cost of personal pod, number of projects piloted
Table 10: Information about ST1.6 (Empower citizen-driven experiments)

4.4.7	ACTION 7: EMBRACE AND EMPLOY A CLOUD-NATIVE SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATION 
STRATEGY
Modern AI operations require both "data" (i.e., access to storage) and "computing" (i.e., access to processing 
power) infrastructures that cooperate to extract the necessary results, either on the training or on the 
inferencing side. Physical locations of data collection/storage and computing infrastructure are separated even 
between the same organizational boundaries, thus hindering the computation process. This is more evident in 
the case where an organization requires to expand its resources and utilize, for instance, an external cloud 
service, without compromising performance and security. Towards this direction, a cloud-native approach 
based on stateless "serverless" microservices that can easily migrate between different physical locations can 
overcome those obstacles. The public sector can help towards this direction by offering cloud-native execution 
frameworks through existing infrastructures thus facilitating someone that wishes to take advantage of their 
functionalities. On the other hand, external stakeholders wishing to harness arbitrary cloud resources can 
adhere to the modern cloud-native implementation paradigm and take advantage of its opportunities.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST1.7: Embrace and Employ a Cloud-Native Software Implementation Strategy
Action Code: ST1.7
Key stakeholders: Government, Private Companies
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
- M6: Framework requirements and design
- M24: Launch services
Links to other STs: ST2.2.1.4, ST3, ST6
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural
Indicative KPIs: Number of Cloud-native tools/libraries support from national infrastructures
Table 11: Information about ST1.7 (Embrace and Employ a Cloud-Native Software Implementation Strategy)

4.4.8	ACTION 8: EMBRACE OPEN CLOUD STANDARDS DURING ML/AI OPERATIONS
Modern AI execution pipelines consist of numerous execution steps that incrementally transform initial data to 
the final ML/AI product: this process requires different processing libraries and execution engines from both 
the Machine Learning and the Data Analytics domains that may also be geographically dispersed. The 
successful execution of such diverse pipelines in Cloud Infrastructures relies on the adoption of open (i.e., non-
proprietary, well documented) standards during both the development and deployment towards an open 
MLOps (similarly to generic DevOps) strategy. An open MLOps approach will minimize vendor-lock-in scenarios 
which may arise when a specific implementation is selected. This will enable the relative stakeholders to 
consider a wider set of possible cloud providers. 
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST1.8: Embrace Open Cloud Standards During ML/AI Operations
Action Code: ST1.8
Key stakeholders: Government, Infrastructure Providers
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
- M6: Framework requirements and design
- M24: Launch services
Links to other STs: ST3, ST4, ST5 (i.e. all actions that entail AI application development on the cloud)
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural
Indicative KPIs: Number of Open APIs support from national infrastructures
Table 12: Information about ST1.8 (Embrace Open Cloud Standards During ML/AI Operations)

4.4.9	ACTION 9: MAINTAIN AND IMPROVE SUPERCOMPUTING INFRASTRUCTURES FOR AI
Leading edge AI applications such as deep learning are extremely data and computationally intensive. 
Therefore, the development of large-scale AI applications requires access to supercomputing resources. Such 
resources should be made freely available to the research and scientific community of the country, as also 
stressed out in ST2. Moreover, taking into account that AI applications require heterogeneous hardware for 
improved performance, such as GPUs, TPUs, etc., existing infrastructures need to upgrade their resources 
towards this direction in the upcoming infrastructure procurement opportunities. Likewise, private sector 
enterprises should be supported as much as possible in getting access to the amount of computational and 
storage resources that might be needed for building innovative AI products and services. Appropriate pricing 
models can be utilized to democratize and regulate the utilization of resources (e.g., a reverse-wholesale 
scheme, where the more time units an entity buys, the more expensive they become, thus offering a financial 
incentive to move out of the innovation-driving infrastructure and towards a general-purpose commercial 
infrastructure as soon as utilization grows beyond some point). To support such needs, GRNET's ARIS 
supercomputing infrastructure should be maintained and upgraded, considering needs for AI application 
development. ML infrastructures (e.g., Deep learning frameworks like TensorFlow) should be provided over 
the supercomputers to allow efficient and scalable ML model training. This also includes computing and 
storage requirements for different types of applications ranging from small-scale deployments to grand 
challenges. In parallel, existing connections with EU-wide infrastructures such as EuroHPC, PRACE, the 
European Open Science Cloud (EOSC) and EU's Artificial Intelligence on Demand (AI4U) platform should be 
strengthened.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST1.9: Embrace Open Cloud Standards During ML/AI Operations
Action Code: ST1.9
Key stakeholders: Government, Infrastructure Providers
Duration: Continuous
Indicative Milestones:
M6 Guidelines for Open Cloud Standards Adoption in ML/AI Applications
Links to other STs: ST2 (i.e. for compute intensive research), ST3, ST4, ST5 (i.e. in actions involving 
computationally demanding problems)
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural
Indicative KPIs: Number of GPUs/CPUs, Number of Computationally Demanding AI Experiments Supported
Table 13: Information about ST1.9 (Embrace Open Cloud Standards During ML/AI Operations)

4.4.10	ACTION 10: GREEN AI INFRASTRUCTURES
Audit and minimize the carbon footprint of AI infrastructures and develop green data centres. AI 
infrastructures should be environmentally friendly and energy efficient. In this direction, the development of 
Green Data Centres should be encouraged and pursued. Relevant specifications should be included in tenders 
and public procurement documents. European best practices and regulations should be considered. 
Furthermore, the environmental footprint of AI infrastructures should be regularly audited in terms of their 
compliance to standards like CENELEC EN 5060025. These activities will complement and enhance those under 
ST6.10: AI for Green Transformation & Sustainable Future, leading to additional benefits about the 
improvement of environment performance and sustainability of the National AI Ecosystem.
Green Data Centres will provide a sound basis for minimizing carbon footprint of AI applications that leverage 
cloud resources. Recently, Green AI approaches are also developed as part of the edge and far-edge 
computing paradigm. For example, TinyML and embedded machine learning technologies enable the 
execution of AI on microcontrollers, which are much more power efficient than data centres and other 
computing devices (e.g., smart phones). Whenever applicable such approaches should be encouraged by 
setting CO2 reduction and other green KPIs in public sector projects and specifications. 
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST1.10: Green AI infrastructures
Action Code: ST1.10
Key stakeholders: Government, Infrastructure Providers, Large Enterprises operating Data Centres
Duration: 12 months
Indicative Milestones:
- M6: Audit carbon footprint of data centres and of alternative AI paradigms (e.g., Edge AI, TinyML) 
- M12: Prepare relevant specifications for tenders and public procurements
Links to other STs: ST6.10, ST5 (i.e., regarding public procurements about AI)
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural
Indicative KPIs: Number of green AI infrastructures; CO2 reduction of AI applications in the Cloud
Table 14: Information about ST1.10 (Green AI infrastructures)

4.4.11	ACTION 11: OPTIMAL USE OF THE SPECTRUM AND CREATION OF DEVELOPERS 
COMMUNITY FOR 5G-DRIVEN APPLICATIONS, EXPLOITING THE 5G-CORE NATIVE APIS
The development of 5G needs a significant amount of new harmonised mobile spectrum so defragmenting and 
clearing prime bands should be prioritised. The need to identify more spectrum below 1 GHz has to be met in 
order to spread the benefits of 5G to rural areas and accelerate Internet of Things (IoT) growth. Moreover, 
spectrum in the 6 and 10 GHz ranges is required to enhance 5G connectivity. Voluntary spectrum sharing 
approaches are preferable to set asides as they can be used to support all potential 5G users, including 
verticals. For example, MNOs can be permitted to lease their spectrum assets so that verticals can build their 
own private 5G networks. On the other hand, in order to justify widespread heavy network investments and 
support 5G services that will enhance AI, mobile operators need assured access to significant amounts of 
licensed spectrum for a sufficient duration (e.g., 20 year licences).
Identification and characterization of economic, security and other risks posed by cyber threats and 
vulnerabilities in 5G infrastructure should also be considered. This recommendation should include 
understanding the global 5G market and 5G capabilities and infrastructure, from both space and terrestrial 
components perspective, in order to eliminate security breaches that could result, among others, to improper 
use of AI-applications at 5G networks.
AI and 5G represent a symbiotic combination and enable each other. To achieve ultra-low latency and meet 
the requirements of AI based use cases such as, self-driving autonomous vehicles, automating or managing 
public transportation, time critical industry automation, remote healthcare, operators need to be able to 
provide computing resources across the whole telco domain - all the way to the edge of the mobile network. 
Service exposure and APIs will play a key role in creating solutions that are both effective and cost efficient.  All 
in all, MNOs should understand that 5G applications and use cases need to be better identified, therefore 
targeting specific industries should be a crucial aspect of their strategy.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST1.11: Optimal use of the spectrum and Creation of Developers Community for 5G-driven 
Applications, exploiting the 5G-Core native APIs
Action Code: ST1.11
Key stakeholders: Government, Infrastructure Providers, MNOs
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
- M6: Defragmenting and clearing of prime bands
- M12: Identification of cyber threats and vulnerabilities
- M24: Launch of APIs/services
Links to other STs: ST2, ST3, ST4, ST5 (wherever bandwidth savvy and other BigData applications are 
involved)
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructure/Regulatory
Indicative KPIs: Spectrum availability, number of identified risks, number of Services/APIs.
Table 15: Information about ST1.11 (Optimal use of the spectrum and Creation of Developers Community for 
5G-driven Applications, exploiting the 5G-Core native APIs)

4.4.12	ACTION 12: NATIONAL RISK ASSESSMENT FOR AI INFRASTRUCTURES AND ADVERSARIAL 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
Threats leading to raised awareness, emerging-threat-ready National Cyber Security Strategy & regulation 
framework and establishment of relevant cyber ranges and testing infrastructures
Besides conventional cybersecurity attacks, adaptive systems also offer new attack surfaces that exploit the 
fact that the system modifies its behaviour based on the data it consumes. Prominent such attacks include 
data poisoning (providing examples that intentionally manipulate the model) and model inversion (using 
model responses to recover parts of the training set). Research into these attacks and how they can be 
mitigated is current and has not reached the maturity needed for deployment.
It is important that AI systems are monitored by human supervisors that are aware of these potential attacks 
and are able to recognize them. It is also important that users of AI technologies are aware about the 
possibility to receive completely manipulated results and do not accept results at face value. At the regulatory 
level, it is important that (a) AI deployments that allow for data collected in the wild to affect their behaviour 
to be clearly marked as such to the users, indicating the possibility that results are corrupted by data 
poisoning; (b) Data providers are explicitly asked to consent to public deployment of the models trained on 
their private data, indicating the possibility that their private data is uncovered.
The implementation of the National Cyber Security Strategy (NCSS) is undertaken by the National Cyber 
Security Authority which was recently created to bridge the organizational and coordinative gap among the 
stakeholders involved in cyberspace security in Greece, both in the public and private sector (ENISA Greek 
NCSS; L4577/2018). The National Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT - Cyberdefense Unit of 
the Hellenic Ministry of Defence) has been established (L4577/2018). National AI Data Infrastructures cyber 
resilience are to be registered to and supported by the National CSIRT. Part of the Greek NCSS is the 
Identification and listing of operators of essential services. This should include AI-driven services and relevant 
data space operators. This is an action coordinated by the National Cyber Security Authority in collaboration 
with relevant stakeholders (L4577/2018 DIRECTIVE (EU) 2016/1148).
In the above context, the action calls for an extensive threat analysis and assessment on a national scale and 
with focus on AI critical data infrastructures and emerging threats from malicious use of AI and Adversarial AI. 
This aims to identify, analyse and evaluate the impact of new risks brought by malicious use of AI and 
Adversarial AI (e.g., AI fuzzing & zero-day attacks, machine learning poisoning). Following this activity, policy 
and regulatory recommendations will be provided in order to update the national cyber security strategy and 
register relevant national AI data infrastructures and essential AI services. The cybersecurity framework and 
regulations should be compatible with the AI legal framework especially in issues like trustworthiness and data 
protection.
Close collaboration with the National CSIRT and the Ministry of Defence is required in the context of national 
cyber defences strategic fortification and capability building. Data Infrastructures to be listed, assessed and 
fortified should be in line with the NCSS priorities while countermeasures and mitigation should apply a holistic 
and horizontal shield across both civil and military data infrastructures. This can benefit from further synergies 
and resources leveraged within the European Defence Fund innovation and development activities (EDF 
framework: 2021-2027).
Following risk assessment, data infrastructures resilience will be assessed given the emerging threats context. 
Countermeasures will also be tested for effectiveness in suitable cyber ranges and testing infrastructures. 
Beginning with the mapping of available cyber ranges on a national scale this action will plan and initiate the 
strategic development of missing capabilities and case-specific specialised cyber ranges. Several activities and 
AI projects for the public sector in 5.2 & 5.4 can liaise and benefit from this action for increased cyber security 
and mainly in terms of increasing research capability, skills capital and gaining competitive advantage in terms 
of know-how, practices and cutting-edge AI cyber security technologies.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST1.12: National Risk Assessment for AI infrastructures and Adversarial Artificial Intelligence
Action Code: ST1.12
Key stakeholders: National CSIRT (Ministry of Defence), National Cyber Security Authority (Ministry of 
Digital Governance), Cybersecurity Competence Centres and Experts, Data Infrastructure Operators, 
Citizens
Duration: 24-36 months
Key Dates :
M6: Identification of threats
M12: national cyber ranges prioritization and mapping
M18: provide amendment recommendations to the national cyber security strategy and mitigation planning
M24: Cyber ranges establishment and initial testing
M36: Countermeasure efficiency measurement and improvement, national capability building in countering 
adversarial AI
Links to other STs: ST2, ST5 (5.2 AI Reference Projects and Success Stories, 5.6 AI for Generating Smart and 
Safe Public Environments), ST6 (6.1 Legal framework for Ethical and Democratic AI)
Type of action: Advisory, Awareness, Legal, Policy making, Operational/Infrastructure
Indicative KPIs: Number of identified risks, raised awareness, updating NCSS and cybersecurity regulatory 
framework (creating AI sub-domain), prioritization and mapping of dedicated cyber ranges and AI data 
infrastructures, Critical Infrastructure registration in collaboration with the Ministry of Defence, 
countermeasures testing and mitigation measures improvement.
Table 16: Information about ST1.12 (National Risk Assessment for AI infrastructures and Adversarial Artificial 
Intelligence)


 
5.	STRATEGIC TARGET 2 (ST2): AI RESEARCH, EDUCATION & SKILLS CAPITAL
5.1	CURRENT STATUS, CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
This Strategic target is organised along three distinct yet interrelated areas of focus: Research, Education, and 
Skills development. Given the broadness and salience of all three areas, we have delved into each topic 
individually and organised the Chapter along three complementary but clearly defined directions. A cross-
cutting theme that traverses all three sub-targets concerns talent retention, development, and attraction, 
which is addressed within a number of actions via case-appropriate measures (e.g., under actions focusing on 
educational reforms, attraction of talented researchers etc). Put together, actions proposed under each of the 
dedicated areas converge to creating a climate that encourages and supports knowledge enhancement, 
upskilling, and research excellence, with the aim to equip Greece with citizens, workers, and leaders who are 
adept to the AI challenges of the 21st century.  

5.1.1	SHORTCOMINGS AND OPPORTUNITIES IN RESEARCH 
Research and development (R&D) is unequivocally recognised as a primary driving force for economic growth, 
with knowledge-based economies being those that are most successful in achieving and improving sustainable 
welfare. Numerous studies have confirmed the particularly high rate of return on public investment in 
research, with the median values ranging between 20% and 50% in terms of annual rates. Similarly, the 
proportion of innovations which could not have been introduced without the contribution of public research is 
found to be between 20% and 75% [ECValueResearch15]. Besides significant benefits for productivity and 
economy, investment in research is known to positively impact on several fronts, including public services, the 
environment, health and welfare, culture and society as a whole. It is important to stress out the 
complementarity between public and private R&D: according to an analysis of 20 OECD countries over a 20-
year period public sector R&D influences business R&D at the level of the economy as well as being reflected in 
patenting [Jaumotte05]. 
Looking at the Greek research landscape, a series of surveys conducted by the Hellenic Artificial Intelligence 
Society about recent activities in a number of subfields of AI, reveal a number of prominent efforts and results 
that span over a wide variety of topics, covering both fundamental topics of AI as well as application areas. 
With respect to the former, there are several renowned research teams working on machine learning and data 
mining, uncertainty in AI, natural language processing, computer vision, robotics, multi-agent and agent-based 
systems, constraint satisfaction, planning and scheduling, and knowledge representation and reasoning 
[Koubarakis18]. The AI community in Greece is also active in developing a wide range of applications covering 
areas such as Entertainment, Business, Commerce, Finance, e-Government, Health and Biomedicine, 
Education, Engineering, Industry, Telecommunications, Web, Pervasive Systems, in conjunction to other 
applications for specific problems in numerous domains [EETN]. 
Despite promising efforts and accomplishments, the potential of the Greek AI research ecosystem is hampered 
by several inhibiting factors. First and foremost, it must cope with difficulties in retaining and attracting 
talented researchers, aggravated by the well-known problem of brain drain. A series of actions that invest in 
human capital ("Rebrain Greece") should be taken with the aim to limit researcher attrition, increase brain 
gain, and ultimately create a critical mass of talented junior and senior researchers as well as eminent research 
projects in relevant key areas of AI. It is important that the respective actions are informed and aligned with 
ongoing developments at the European level, e.g., take into account priority areas set forth by upcoming 
research calls, such as Trustworthy AI, Greener AI, Sparking the edge-to-cloud AI Revolution, Next generation 
of Smart Robotics, and other related domains. Good practices for retaining, attracting and retaining talent 
should be adopted, e.g., see [EURegions18], taking into account the Greek circumstances. 
Greece lacks a fully functioning, harmonized AI ecosystem that can establish the foundation for boosting value 
created by the development and deployment of AI technologies. No single player can achieve this alone; the 
sharing of assets, technology, skills, and knowledge is crucial. Joint R&D can help strengthen AI cooperation 
across research organisations with shared goals and values and pool resources and expertise to enable greater 
research impact and larger scale research on topics of importance. Coordination can also help identify 
duplicative research that should be turned into joint efforts.
It is important that actions focused on supporting research activities are coupled with appropriate measures 
that ensure that the Greek educational system produces enough talented AI researchers. A relevant and cost-
efficient method to make Greece competitive in the international AI research ecosystem is to invest in 
multidisciplinary. As a matter of fact, AI is a research topic that has a lot to gain from cross-fertilisation with 
fields outside Computer Science. For example, mathematicians and statisticians can provide new insights with 
regards to fundamental AI problems, whereas biochemists, biologists and other disciplines can provide 
interesting research problems and application domains that will fuel AI research. On the other hand, social 
studies and other disciplines such as philosophy and ethics can contribute to a humane, trustworthy and 
acceptable AI, aligned to current (and future) values, also studying the interaction between AI and societal 
dimensions.
As affirmed by a series of studies (see for example [EETN], [Accenture19], [BCG20]) the Greek industry is not 
significantly involved in the developing and/or exploitation of AI applications. As a result, many attempts to 
build intelligent systems stop at the production of prototypes rather than commercial products. Therefore, it is 
important to place emphasis on actions towards reinforcing lab-to-the-market initiatives, which incentivize 
collaborations with the industry and boost uptake of research by businesses. Actions aiming at bridging the 
gap between research and industry for the mutual benefit of both sectors are covered under ST3 about 
building up a robust Innovation Ecosystem. 
Another key enabler to getting the most out of AI is having a "data-friendly ecosystem with unified standards 
and cross-platform sharing". AI depends on data that can be analysed in real time and brought to bear on 
concrete problems. According to a McKinsey Global Institute study, nations that promote open data sources 
and data sharing are the ones most likely to see AI advances [McKinsey17]. In general, the research community 
needs better access to government and business data, although with appropriate safeguards to make sure 
researchers do not misuse data. Data sharing should be complemented with affordable access to 
computational power and storage capacity. It is also essential to ease access to a modern infrastructure that 
offers researchers maximum performance for high-performance simulation, data processing and analytics, 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning, enabling them to overcome current limitations, explore new 
applications, tackle forthcoming challenges in science and advance the competitiveness of research and 
innovation in Greece. In this respect, the participation of Greek stakeholders in ongoing EU-level initiatives, 
such as in the EuroCC European network of 33 National HPC Competence Centres (in which Greece is 
represented via (GRNET, NCSR-D, FORTH, AUTH, ICCS) and the European supercomputer Leonardo managed 
by the EuroHPC Joint Undertaking (in which Greece participates via GRNET) should be supported and 
extended, to ensure that Greece's computing infrastructures are upscaled and catch-up the latest 
developments in the field. Therefore, Actions detailed under ST1 towards enhancing the provision of 
computational power and storage capacity for the research community is essential for the research and 
educational community.
5.1.2	SHORTCOMINGS AND OPPORTUNITIES IN EDUCATION
As AI applications accelerate across many sectors, it is vital that we reimagine our educational institutions for a 
world where AI will be ubiquitous, and students need a different kind of training than they currently receive. 
Despite some first steps which have been taken both at the primary-secondary as well as tertiary level, many 
students still do not receive instruction in the kinds of skills that are needed in an AI-dominated landscape.
Many Greek men and women choose to pursue tertiary studies in STEM-related subjects, including AI. 
According to data published by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Greece 
ranks sixth in the world with respect to its number of STEM graduates (based on information gathered in 
2012). An interesting insight concerns the fact that Greece is the second country, behind Italy, regarding the 
number of women who chose natural sciences and engineering for their post-secondary education, with 44% 
percent of individuals studying in these fields being women. 
According to an ongoing data collection from the Hellenic AI Society (EETN - www.eetn.gr), more than 150 
total AI-related courses are offered in BSc or BSc-integrated-MSc (5-year) programmes of at least 21 
universities. A variety of topics are covered, ranging from artificial intelligence and robotics, to pattern 
recognition, computer vision, natural language processing, machine learning (and deep learning) and data 
mining. Courses also include big data aspects, as well as topics on the Internet of Things and the Semantic 
Web. At the MSc level, approximately 50 MSc. programmes offer a total of over 160 AI-related modules. These 
modules provide deeper understanding of AI topics, including specific application domains (space, energy, 
geographical information systems, bio-medical informatics, networks, business intelligence etc.) and other 
multidisciplinary research topics (e.g. intelligent management of data from the Humanities, cyber-physical 
systems, human-computer interaction). Moreover, an agreement between the Ministry of Education and 
Religious Affairs and the country's tertiary institutions is under way about the organisation of courses covering 
technical developments in AI and market applications. 
Despite the high interest by young people to major in STEM and the increasing offer of AI-relevant 
undergraduate courses and MSc programmes, demand for graduates with competent skills in AI fundamentals 
and applications (including data scientists, computer scientists, engineers, coders, and platform developers) in 
the marketplace remains unmet. At the same time, students who major in disciplines beyond computer 
science lack the necessary knowledge and skills to take advantage of AI developments in their domain of 
specialisation. Appropriate initiatives have to be introduced in the educational system at all levels in order to 
bridge the gap between offer and supply of people with such capabilities.
Higher Educational Institutions (HEIs) have also an important role to play with respect to raising awareness 
about AI concepts, promises, and risks among the broader public. Open actions organised by HEIs and research 
centres, such as the well-attended Researcher's Night initiatives, aimed at bringing the public - and especially 
young people- into contact with research developments and to stimulate interest in STEM careers need to be 
scaled up. Special attention should be paid to building links with primary and secondary schools, so as to 
engage pupils and, notably, those who do not have easy access to, and thus are less inclined to engage in, 
STEM or research activities. 
In primary and secondary education, enabling students to develop knowledge about AI and computational 
thinking in general has less to do with the use of high-tech digital tools in the classroom and more with the 
design of appropriate school curricula and the way STEM is integrated in existing subjects taught at schools of 
all levels. In a typical Greek classroom, epistemic and scientific concepts remain at large disconnected from 
experiential learning and experimentation, while applied and technological modules, such as ICT, do not keep 
up with evolutions in the technological state of the art. This situation is reaffirmed by the status of OER 
repositories (e.g., photodentro, ebooks) addressed to educators, which include very limited if any resources 
related to AI. Actually, most existing STEM-related applied tools and practices are limited to material 
addressed to EPAL educators and students.
One of the main objectives of the Greek Digital Strategy (Objective 3) is the upskilling of Greek pupils and 
educators with respect to digital competences. So far, recent initiatives taken in primary and secondary 
education, such as the "Digital School Strategy", the EduLabs, and the Skills Labs for educators, have primarily 
focused on the digital upgrade of Greek schools, via equipping schools with ICT devices (e.g., installation of 
interactive systems, laptops) and via training courses for teachers on the application of digital tools. Although 
these are some first steps towards improving digital competences of both teachers and pupils, a more holistic 
and radical reform that goes beyond the use of ICT tools is required towards creating better prepared 
graduates who are able to compete globally.
 
5.1.3	SHORTCOMINGS AND OPPORTUNITIES IN SKILLS CAPITAL
With the acceleration of AI expansion across most sectors of the private and public economy, the required 
skills of public and private employees have not necessarily been updated, respectively. Also, even though: (a) 
STEM-related education is among the first choices of Greek students (b) during the last years around 50 MSc 
programs offer AI-related courses and (c) more than 150 AI-courses are offered by Greek BSc programs, there 
is still a huge need for updating the existing workforce of both the public and the private sector, as well as the 
broader public, with practical and theoretical skills related to AI and ML. Specifically, it is important to develop 
employee skills, with respect to both the technical and the business fronts [Koumbarakis18]: technical skills are 
crucial for people who develop the AI solutions, while digital savviness is crucial for the businesspeople who 
identify the use cases and support their development.
The existing workforce in the public and private sector (even the employees with a STEM major), in many cases 
have been out of the higher educational system since the time when AI and ML courses at BSc or MSc were 
not so frequent. Even those with sufficient theoretical ML and AI skills achieved through a BSc or MSc 
program, usually lack the practical knowledge necessary in the industry, especially those that have worked for 
several years in other CS positions not requiring AI skills (frontend developers, backend developers, software 
engineers, data engineers, etc)
Most major Greek companies, SMEs and start-ups have started involving procedures and products that are 
based on AI methodologies. In many cases, (especially in the cases of start-ups) AI and ML is a core element of 
the product offering. This continuously increasing and horizontal demand for AI expertise and understanding in 
both research-level and product-level is naturally left unmet and is usually covered with self-taught and non-
expert schemes. In simple words, "career shifts" such as: software developers to "AI/ML engineers", database 
engineers to "data scientists" or even non-technical employees to "business intelligence" are usually 
performed through a quick bootcamp or a short online seminary or even hands-on internal knowledge, 
without always following an organized onboarding process.  
On the other hand, highly qualified research and academic staff of Greek Universities and Research Centers, 
have gained enormous experience and international scientific validity in the sector of AI and to its applications 
such as: computer vision, multimodal data processing, audio and speech processing, natural language 
understanding, etc.  Despite this potential, there is still a gap between the research and the business aspects of 
AI, especially when it comes to communicating AI methodologies and deploying AI solutions in real-world 
products and services, but also in non-business applications.
For the aforementioned reasons, there is a need for a better combination of business and technical skills. Most 
organizations, regardless of their scale (large corporates to start-ups) have not fully realized the full potential 
and challenges of AI, creating an explicit need for an organized upskilling of the public and private sector 
employees, the executives and even the broader public, towards making the capabilities and intricacies of AI 
an inherent component of their work and life.   



5.2	ST2 ACTIONS PLAN
5.2.1	ACTIONS FOR AI RESEARCH
5.2.1.1	ACTION 1. EQUIP THE AI RESEARCH ECOSYSTEM WITH TALENTED RESEARCHERS THROUGH 
INVESTING IN HUMAN CAPITA
Existing funding instruments, such as the Hellenic Foundation on Research and Innovation (HFRI), should be 
leveraged to provide funding to young researchers (PhDs, postdocs) to work on AI-related fields. This could be 
done, e.g., by appropriate calls for proposals, specifically aimed at young researchers. Moreover, appropriate 
incentives for young researchers should be provided, including monetary incentives (salaries) and 
opportunities for career development, which are important to stimulate talented people to work within the 
Greek research community after they finish their graduate and postgraduate studies. For example, decisions 
limiting post-doctoral researcher salaries, especially when compared to the industry in Greece and abroad, 
constitute counterincentives and should be revisited.
Junior researchers are critical for excellence, but not sufficient to guarantee a competitive AI research 
ecosystem. On the other side of the spectrum, senior researchers with a strong track record should also be 
supported to set up competent teams (e.g., via senior fellowships, creation of tenured staff positions) and act 
as attraction poles and inspiration for young researchers working on AI.
Moreover, given the large Greek human capital abroad, incentives should be provided for the repatriation of 
Greek scientists living (and working) abroad, by improving Greece's appeal to foreign talent. To achieve this, a 
critical mass of attractive positions, projects and centres of excellence, grounded on transparent selection 
criteria of eminence should be created. Stimuli for retaining and attracting talent should consider the offering 
of both tangible and intangible perks (e.g., by allocating an attractive ratio between research-oriented and 
educational or administrative tasks) as well as the mitigation of structural impediments. Offering growth 
opportunities, improving working conditions, providing internationally competitive salaries, and reducing 
hurdles associated with the unpredictability of the operational environment and appointment procedures, are 
some measures that can significantly increase the "brain-gain" phenomenon and counterbalance the 
inevitable brain drain. 
Given the fast development of the AI field, it is also important to keep up with developments and be agile in 
adapting to changes in the AI research environment. Towards this aim, it is important to set up an Expert 
Group that will follow developments on the field, continuously assess the country's needs and strengths, and 
adapt the above suggestions accordingly, e.g., by proposing areas in which more focus on attracting talents 
should be placed.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action 2.1.1: Equip the AI research ecosystem with talented Researchers through investing in Human Capital
Action Code: ST2.1.1
Key stakeholders:  Universities, Research Centres, Central Government
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M4: Setup of Experts Group 
M8: Report on specific measures about stimuli measures and more structural changes, taking into account 
priority areas and the actual needs of the targeted talent at different levels (from PhDs to tenured academic 
positions)
M16: publication of position openings for junior/senior researchers, initial legal steps towards the 
establishment of a stable working and appointment environment for researchers
M24: Applications handled, and first positions filled
Links to other STs: ST3, ST6.1.3
Type of action:  Funding, Regulatory, Operational
Indicative KPIs: # of PhD positions opened; # of senior research fellow and tenured lecturer/ professor 
positions opened; # of researchers from abroad that apply for Greek-based research positions; % expected 
increase of the number of AI/ML researchers.
Table 17: Information about Action ST2.1.1 (Equip the AI research ecosystem with talented Researchers 
through investing in Human Capital)

5.2.1.2	ACTION 2: SUPPORT EXISTING AND NEW RESEARCH INITIATIVES ON AI, ENSURING A 
BALANCE BETWEEN FUNDAMENTAL AND APPLIED RESEARCH
Public programmes and calls for AI-related projects should be set up with the aim to: (i) increase investment in 
projects in AI fundamental research; and (ii) direct funding on AI applications that are expected to bring a high 
economic and social impact. HFRI's role should be leveraged in this respect.
A series of challenging AI areas to which funding should be directed has to be defined.  AI projects can be 
supported via individual fellowships and especially through the funding of projects led by consortia of 
stakeholders. In the latter case, special emphasis should be placed on basic and applied research that couples 
AI with other dimensions, such as Data Science, Robotics, Cloud Computing, Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
etc, through projects driven by small consortia that comprise at least 2 academic/research partners. Topics 
that are recognized as high priority for Europe in the years to come, such as Next Generation AI, Greener AI, 
Trustworthy AI, edge-to-cloud AI, Smart Robotics, Distributed AI, Human-AI Augmentation/Collaboration, 
Privacy-Preserving AI, Swarm AI, and TinyML should also be prioritised. In the years to come significant 
research opportunities in these areas are likely to emerge. Greece should be prepared to address these 
emerging AI areas and to pursue relevant opportunities for excellent research and attraction of funding.
At the same time, funding should also be directed to synergies that exhibit uptake of AI by social sciences, 
humanities, and social innovation initiative, that may not draw upon conventional short-term Return on 
Investment measurements but have a multi-dimensional social impact and contribute to improving conditions 
for innovation that goes beyond financial value creation. In this context, there is great potential in 
multidisciplinary synergies that explore the potential of AI and ICT in the cultural heritage sector and history 
studies but also in collaborations between the research community with civic society organisations that aim to 
mitigate society's pressing problems (see also actions contributing to a more inclusive AI in ST6).
Moreover, AI research findings can find applications in public administration. The Ministry of Digital 
Transformation could consider defining specific AI-related problems that could support the functioning of the 
public administration (e.g., algorithms for spotting financial crimes such as tax evasion or money laundering) 
and outsourcing them through competitive calls for proposals to Greek companies or research institutes, e.g., 
using the HFRI instrument. This would encourage research on AI, to support the development of solutions for 
such problems.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.

Action ST2.2.2: Support existing and new research initiatives on AI, ensuring a balance between 
fundamental and applied research
Action Code: ST2.1.2
Key stakeholders: Universities, Schools, Research Centres, Ministry of Education
Duration: 18 months
Indicative Milestones:
M6: Areas of focus, types of calls, and evaluation metrics and mechanism defined
M10: First round of calls announced
M18: Submissions of first round of calls evaluated and first projects kick-off  
Links to other STs: ST5, ST6
Type of action:  Funding, Operational
Indicative KPIs:  # of national calls on AI and relevant multidisciplinary areas; # of areas covered by these 
calls; # of stakeholders participating in consortia of projects on AI.
Table 18: Information about Action ST2.1.2 (Support existing and new research initiatives on AI, ensuring a 
balance between fundamental and applied research)

5.2.1.3	ACTION 3: PROMOTE COLLABORATIONS ACROSS RESEARCH CENTRES AND UNIVERSITIES AT 
AN INTERNATIONAL LEVEL
Research on AI requires access to a significant amount of computational resources, large datasets and multi-
faceted data. This encourages collaborations and makes AI one of the fields where collaborative work creates 
an additive effect. This fact, combined with the recent hype associated with AI, has spawned a significant 
number of initiatives in Europe and elsewhere, which aim at supporting collaborative AI research, by 
establishing partnerships between research stakeholders in the field across different countries and fostering 
the AI research community be developing standards, common repositories for data, methodologies and even 
code. Such initiatives include organisations such as the CLAIRE (and the CLAIRE International Advisory Board) 
and ELLIS, and projects (EU Networks of Excellence) such as AI4EU, TAILOR, HumanAI, ELLIS/ELISE and 
AI4Media. Greek academic and industrial partners should be encouraged to participate in such initiatives and 
have a say in the formulation of future initiatives related to AI. The Greek state should also be involved 
through some appropriate scheme. As a first step, an inventory of relevant EU-level and international 
initiatives and of respective roles of Greek stakeholders in existing partnerships should be created.
Moreover, collaborations with foreign AI research stakeholders should be supported by setting-up mobility 
programs for experts and by strengthening collaborations with AI researchers of the Greek diaspora (e.g., via 
R&D or Technology Transfer programs).
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST2.1.3: Promote Collaborations across Research Centres and Universities at an International Level
Action Code: ST2.1.3
Key stakeholders: Universities, Research Centres, Ministry of Education
Duration: 12 months
Indicative Milestones:
M6: Create a maintainable registry of relevant international initiatives.
M12: Set-up a mobility program, using funds from HFRI.
Links to other STs:  ST4
Type of action: Operational, Funding
Indicative KPIs:  # of universities and research organisations participating in at least one of the 
organisations recorded in the registry, # of Greek researchers visiting foreign organisations, # of foreign 
researchers visiting Greek Universities and research institutes.
Table 19: Information about Action ST2.1.3 (Promote Collaborations across Research Centres and Universities 
at an International Level)

5.2.1.4	ACTION 4: ESTABLISH A CONFEDERATION OF UNIVERSITIES AND RESEARCH CENTRES TO 
COORDINATE ACTIVITIES AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL
A body that oversees and coordinates research activities in different AI areas conducted across different 
laboratories in Greece can highly contribute towards pooling resources and expertise to enable greater 
research impact and joining efforts towards larger scale and more efficient research in topics of importance. 
The coordination can be grounded in a series of agreements between different universities, research centres 
and other partners active in basic or applied AI research or even take the form of a new separate legal entity. 
Partnerships between different bodies active in AI research can take many forms. Some examples include 
Cooperative Research and Development Agreements (CRADAs), Collaborative Research Alliances (CRAs), 
Collaborative Technical Alliances (CTAs), and University Affiliated Research Centers (UARCs). The following 
table summarizes the agreement mechanisms available, which are categorized thematically as follows:
*	Research partnership agreements. These agreements provide for joint and collaborative research.
*	Resource-use agreements. These agreements allow partners to use laboratory equipment offered by 
other partners for testing and evaluation.
*	Personnel exchange agreements. These agreements support mobility across different organisations and 
enable researchers (usually those more advanced in their careers) from one organization to be employed 
temporarily or indefinitely by another organization.
*	Educational agreements. These agreements offer opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students, 
post-doctoral fellows, and professors to extend their education and research experience and for 
universities to co-develop educational initiatives with Federal laboratories.
*	Other types of agreements. Agreements with actors from the public and private sector or who are 
interested in setting up research.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST2.1.4: Establish a Confederation of Universities and Research Centres to Coordinate activities at 
the National Level
Action Code: ST2.1.4
Key stakeholders: Universities, Research Centres, Ministry of Education
Duration: 18 months
Indicative Milestones:
M10: First discussions and creation of record of interested stakeholders 
M18: Several agreements between stakeholders in effect
Links to other STs: ST6
Type of action:  Operational
Indicative KPIs:  # Research partnership agreements, #Resource-use agreements, # Personnel exchange 
agreements. #Educational agreements, #Other types of agreements.
Table 20: Information about Action ST2.1.4 (Establish a Confederation of Universities and Research Centres to 
Coordinate activities at the National Level)

5.2.1.5	ACTION 5. IMPROVING KNOWLEDGE SHARING AND DATA ACCESS FOR THE RESEARCH 
COMMUNITY 
Recognising that data is one of the most important prerequisites for AI developments, the Greek government 
could pay special attention to the provision of a well-functioning data infrastructure. Existing open data portals 
should be upgraded, especially with respect to the quality of the offered databases and the alignment with 
unified standards, so as to promote accessibility to data of public administrations. An appropriate 
infrastructure which provides data, software and high-performance computing services required for AI R&D 
should be developed and, in this respect, the Action would highly benefit from open data repositories 
presented in ST2.2 and ST2.3 and the testing and experimentation infrastructures described in ST1.5 and ST3.2 
(. In addition, the provision of high-quality data should be coupled with the modernisation of the digital and 
telecommunication infrastructure as detailed in ST1.9.
Concerning accessibility to proprietary data, the Greek data strategy should build bridges between researchers 
and companies to encourage sharing of data while paying attention to consumer protection. For example, one 
way could be through voluntary agreements with companies holding proprietary data. Facebook, for example, 
recently announced a partnership with Stanford economist Raj Chetty to use its social media data to explore 
inequality. As part of the arrangement, researchers were required to undergo background checks and could 
only access data from secured sites in order to protect user privacy and security. Entities playing the role of 
Data Brokers as described in ST1.4 could have a role in orchestrating such agreements.
Open Access to scientific results is also a key tool for promoting AI research, improving the quality of research 
and the free dissemination of knowledge in society. To promote the open AI science policy, efforts should be 
made towards the establishment of an "Open" AI national network that involves Greek stakeholders in 
discussions around Open Science, building on the insights provided in the proposal for a National Open Science 
Strategy drafted by a team of  research centres, universities and other stakeholders [AAG2020].In doing so, a  
set of landscaping activities and surveys should take place, so as to get a better understanding of the Greek AI 
research ecosystem, identify and realise the challenges behind technical, ethical and cultural aspects in 
choosing Open Access, and reflecting perceptions of diverse national stakeholders. Some of the 
aforementioned activities can be performed with and for the General Secretariat of Research and Technology 
(GSRT) in the context of the working group on Open Science that has established with the ATHENA R.C., which 
already acts as the National Open Access Desk (NOAD) for Greece. Greek OpenAIRE NOAD can facilitate those 
processes for literature and data repositories to become compliant with Article 29.2 of the H2020 grant 
agreement and enhance their visibility both nationally and in the EU. The Greek OpenAIRE NOAD in 
collaboration with academic and research organisations should intensify its efforts to spread awareness 
through a number of activities: webinars in Greek language to inform about trends in OA to AI related 
publications, research data, to update on EU requirements and the EOSC, etc. workshops targeting all 
stakeholders to discuss and work together on pre-defined issues training events in issues around Open Science 
(e.g. data management plans) and in using specific OpenAIRE services and tools (e.g. Amnesia).
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST2.1.5: Improving Knowledge Sharing and Data Access for the Research Community
Action Code: ST2.1.5
Key stakeholders: Universities, Research Centres, Businesses, Central Government
Duration: 18 months
Indicative Milestones: 
M6: Requirements and specifications for the data and knowledge sharing ecosystem to take place defined
M12: Series of training and knowledge awareness actions on open access organised
M18: Data repositories available together with tools for monitoring of data usage
Links to other STs:  ST1, ST3, ST6
Type of action: Operational
Indicative KPIs:  # of webinars in Greek language to inform about trends in OA to AI related publications and 
research data; #workshops targeting all stakeholders to discuss and work together on pre-defined issues 
around Open Science; # of Greek Research Centers and Labs that are using the specific OpenAIRE services; # 
of open datasets per domain
Table 21: Information about Action ST2.1.5 (Improving Knowledge Sharing and Data Access for the Research 
Community)
5.2.2	ACTIONS PLAN FOR AI IN EDUCATION
5.2.2.1	HIGHER EDUCATION
5.2.2.1.1	ACTION 1. ENHANCE MULTIDISCIPLINARY UNDER- AND POSTGRADUATE COURSES AND 
PROGRAMMES ON AI-RELATED SUBJECTS, INCLUDING INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMMES 
Tertiary institutions should offer more courses and postgraduate programmes on data science and AI methods 
as well as aim to increase the number of accepted students at existing AI postgraduate programmes. Such 
programmes should also target students from disciplines beyond natural sciences and technology, from 
humanities and health to finance and agriculture. To this end, existing initiatives should be broadened towards 
an interdisciplinary direction, through the collaboration between Computer Science (CS) departments and 
departments from the humanities, health, environmental, engineering and other disciplines. 
The main aim should be that students from all disciplines learn how they can take advantage of AI technologies 
and methods to facilitate tasks and solve problems in their sector of expertise and become aware of the 
ethical concerns and other complexities involved. 
This aim can be achieved by (i) introducing more courses on AI and data science in BSc degrees of non-CS 
departments and (ii) organising general-purpose MSc programmes on AI fundamentals targeting students 
across disciplines as well sector-specific specialisations on AI applications. Coordination between the various 
programmes must be sought towards minimizing overlaps and maximizing value for money. Special emphasis 
should be laid on courses that equip students with knowledge and skills that can prove helpful in domains 
where Greece has a competitive advantage and are expected to produce a high economic and societal impact, 
such as maritime transport, tourism and cultural heritage, health, and legal sectors. Agreements between the 
Education Ministry and the country's tertiary institutions can be established towards this direction. 
Dedicated efforts towards the creation of programmes on AI taught in English should be made, with the aim to 
attract international students.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST2.2.1.1: Enhance multidisciplinary under- and postgraduate courses and Programmes on AI-related 
Subjects, including International Programmes
Action Code: ST2.2.1.1
Key stakeholders: Universities, Ministry of Education
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M6: Suggested additions to existing BSc programmes for confirmation by Universities
M12: Multi-disciplinary and domain-specific MSc programme proposals
Links to other STs: ST3, ST4, ST6.1.3
Type of action: Regulatory / Operational 
Indicative KPIs: # of programmes that added AI-related courses; # of Multi-disciplinary MSc programme 
suggestions; # of domain MSc cross-fertilized with AI
Table 22: Information about Action ST2.2.1.1 (Enhance multidisciplinary under- and postgraduate courses and 
Programmes on AI-related Subjects, including International Programmes)

5.2.2.1.2	ACTION 2. STRENGTHEN INTERNSHIP OPPORTUNITIES AND LINKS WITH AI RESEARCH AS 
PART OF UNIVERSITY CURRICULA
Links between tertiary education and research on AI should be strengthened, mainly by associating relevant 
BSc and diploma theses with ongoing research conducted by academics and by building collaborations 
between universities and research centres in this context. In tandem with involving students in research-
oriented activities, another equally salient objective concerns the reinforcement of internship programmes for 
students on projects that utilize AI methods in commercial technology development and applications. 
Universities should encourage students to take up internships and engage in global internships programmes. 
More collaborations and agreements with local businesses which can offer training opportunities for students 
in AI-related subjects should be established, e.g. in the framework of BSc/diploma theses or as part of 
dedicated traineeship programmes that are part of universities curricula. Moreover, industrial PhDs to be 
carried out in a collaboration that involves a private or public sector company and a university should be 
reinforced.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST2.2.1.2: Strengthen Internship Opportunities and links with AI Research as part of University 
Curricula
Action Code: ST2.2.1.2
Key stakeholders:  Universities, Private sector, Research Centres
Duration: 18 months
Indicative Milestones:
Μ12: Concrete proposals for department-appropriate reforms to curricula ready
M18: Agreements and collaborations between universities and businesses as well as research centres 
established
Links to other STs: ST3, ST4
Type of action: Operational, Funding
Indicative KPIs: # internships in AI offered by Greek enterprises; # internships in AI attended by students (in 
Greece and abroad)
Table 23: Information about Action ST2.2.1.2 (Strengthen Internship Opportunities and links with AI Research 
as part of University Curricula)

5.2.2.1.3	ACTION 3: ESTABLISH COLLABORATIONS BETWEEN HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS 
AND PRIMARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS TO BRING PUPILS IN CONTACT WITH LATEST 
ADVANCES IN AI
A more coordinated approach regarding initiatives that open up universities and research centres to pupils 
attending primary and secondary schools should be adopted, so as to reinforce interest of pupils in AI and 
STEM and inform their career choices. A centralised inventory of existing and planned initiatives (e.g. visits to 
university labs, demonstration sessions of research achievements, courses addressed to pupils etc) should be 
created and a nationwide programme for the participation of schools in such events should be organised. 
Moreover, universities should contribute with the delivery of educational material on science and technology 
that can be used by educators, pupils, their families and the broader public in general. 
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST2.2.1.3: Establish collaborations between Higher Education Institutions and Primary and Secondary 
schools to bring pupils in contact with Latest Advances in AI
Action Code: ST2.2.1.3
Key stakeholders: Universities, Schools, Research Centres, Ministry of Education
Duration: 18 months
Indicative Milestones:
M12: Record of interested universities and research bodies and the activities they offer (or are interested in 
offering) 
M18: Nationwide programme of open AI sessions begins to run
Links to other STs: ST6.1.3
Type of action: Operational
Indicative KPIs: # of universities and research organisations offering open AI events; # of schools attending 
open AI events.
Table 24: Information about Action ST2.2.1.3 (Establish collaborations between Higher Education Institutions 
and Primary and Secondary schools to bring pupils in contact with Latest Advances in AI)

5.2.2.1.4	ACTION 4: ORGANISE CITIZEN SCIENCE INITIATIVES TO INVOLVE THE BROADER PUBLIC 
IN ONGOING AI RESEARCH PROJECTS 
The organisation of Citizen Science initiatives by HEIs in collaboration with public organisations and research 
institutions can highly contribute towards broadening knowledge on the potential and impact of AI. Citizen 
Science is a form of crowdsourcing that allows participants to become directly involved in the scientific process 
through data collection and other direct contributions to research for the mutual benefit of the scientific 
community and participants. Citizen science projects can bring unique benefits, including accelerating scientific 
research (e.g. by providing annotating datasets, observations etc), providing hands-on learning on state-of-the-
art scientific developments, increasing STEM literacy, and addressing societal needs. A Citizen Science 
Authority (which can get inspiration from the US-based Federal Community of Practice for Crowdsourcing and 
Citizen Science ) can be established across departments and disciplines to coordinate and support actions in 
the field (e.g. help organise and document initiatives for citizen engagement, organise citizen prize 
competitions). Participation of Greek organisations in ongoing EU-level initiatives such as the European Citizen 
Science Association should be promoted as well. This action should coordinate with actions aimed towards 
democratisation of science and AI at large under ST6. Moreover, it can benefit from the infrastructure for 
citizen-provided data described in ST1- Action 6, but also from the awareness events in ST3.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST2.2.1.4: Organise Citizen Science initiatives to involve the broader public in ongoing AI research 
projects
Action Code: ST2.2.1.4
Key stakeholders: Universities, Research Centres, Wider public, Civic Society
Duration: 18 months
Indicative Milestones:
M6: Establishment of Citizen Science Board and identification of interested stakeholders from academia 
M10: Development of supporting framework (report on good practices, repository of crowdsourcing and 
other tools etc)
M12: Open call on innovative citizen science projects
M18: First round of projects completed and prizes awarded
Links to other STs: ST6.6, ST1.6, ST3
Type of action: Informative, educational, financing, operational
Indicative KPIs:  # of citizen science projects started; # of contributors/participants to those projects; # of 
calls announced, number of contributions (e.g. policy suggestions or reports) by the initiatives
Table 25: Information about Action ST2.2.1.4 (Organise Citizen Science initiatives to involve the broader public 
in ongoing AI research projects)

5.2.2.2	PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION
5.2.2.2.1	ACTION 1. STRENGTHEN STEM EDUCATION IN PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION 
CURRICULA. 
This action should be seen as a reinforcement and upgrade of current strategies and initiatives towards the 
improvement of educators and pupils' digital skills towards a more holistic approach to STEM education. 
Necessary reforms should be introduced with the aim to combine science, technology, engineering and 
mathematics into a cohesive curriculum that balances between epistemological knowledge with real-world 
problem-solving. A committee should be formed and assigned with the task to propose concrete actions 
towards an integrated STEM approach in Greek primary and secondary education, including EPAL (Vocational 
Senior Highschools), so as to incorporate into schools best teaching and learning practices and concepts for the 
operative delivery of STEM interdisciplinary didactic models. STEM-oriented educational approaches followed 
in other countries need to be studied, evaluated and adjusted taking into account the constraints and 
characteristics of the Greek reality. 
Digital literacy and engineering competency should be pursued in a more general and systematic 
interdisciplinary context that fosters discovery and experiential learning. In this respect, the focus of ICT-
related subjects should be less about teaching the use of technological artifacts and more about exercising 
algorithmic knowledge and connecting concepts from mathematics, physics etc to engineering design and 
experimentation in a practical setting. All pupils, independently of whether they will major in STEM or not, 
should be able to recognize how AI and digital technologies influence people and systems as well as 
understand that they can be useful and relevant in different sectors, from humanities to health and the 
environment. Discussion about ethical aspects of AI should also become part of schools' curricula. This action 
should coordinate with Action 2, focusing on offering professional development opportunities to teachers.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST2.2.2.1: Strengthen STEM education in primary and secondary education curricula
Action Code: ST2.2.2.1
Key stakeholders: Ministry of Education
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M12: Policy brief by committee ready
M16: Dialogue with the educators' community and feedback from relevant educational organisations 
completed
M24: Law ready
Links to other STs: ST6.1.3
Type of action:  Legislative/Regulatory
Indicative KPIs: # of best practice reports; # of participants in consultation processes; # of 
schools/programmes that have updated curricula; # of impacted students
Table 26: Information about Action ST2.2.2.1 (Strengthen STEM education in primary and secondary education 
curricula)

5.2.2.2	ACTION 2: TRAIN EDUCATORS ON STEM SUBJECTS AND PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES, 
SUPPORT THEM TO APPLY GOOD PRACTICES, AND EQUIP SCHOOLS.
This action should be seen as complementary and supportive to the legislative/regulatory action 1 above. A 
prerequisite for a successful STEM approach is the appropriate training and support of educators in gaining 
appropriate content knowledge in STEM subjects as well as instructional practices and pedagogical strategies 
they can integrate in the modules they teach. Training programmes addressed to educators should be 
organised on topics such as: strengthening their knowledge on STEM subjects; incorporating innovative STEM 
pedagogical methods into teaching approaches; reusing available open resources; AI concepts and methods 
that can be incorporated and discussed in the context of current modules, both from the ethical-philosophical 
perspectives and the scientific/technological one. Introducing incentives for educators to expand their skills via 
training and to integrate innovative pedagogical practices to the traditional teaching routine and organise 
respective initiatives (such as experiments, team projects implementation, attend visits and programmes 
organised in collaboration with researchers and innovators etc) would expedite the reform process. A 
monitoring mechanism for overseeing and recording the concrete ways in which schools' uptake and 
implement STEM initiatives would also be helpful. This could be initially done via pilot actions, targeting 
specific schools. In the longer term, initial teachers' education has to be aligned accordingly.
Pilot actions for the establishment and equipment of science, engineering and technology labs at schools 
should be expanded, with the aim to reinforce project-based learning processes and act as a space for 
experimentation, discovery, and teamwork. 
Moreover, open Educational Resources repositories for educators should be improved and enriched with 
practical methods, examples, tools, and reading material related to AI and STEM in general, especially with 
respect to approaches that can be readily incorporated by educators in existing modules. An effort towards 
translating available MOOC and other material that supports good practices from around the world would 
contribute to this direction in coordination with broader actions aiming to the up-skilling of Greece's 
workforce see actions under the following Section).
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST2.2.2.2: Train educators on STEM subjects and pedagogical approaches, support them to apply 
good practices, and equip schools.
Action Code: ST2.2.2.2
Key stakeholders: Ministry of Education, Teachers
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M12: STEM monitoring and incentives mechanism in place;
M18: Training programmes and relevant material on offer;
M24: First round of pilot actions complete
Links to other STs: -
Type of action: Operational / Funding 
Indicative KPIs: # of educators who have attended training programmes on STEM; #schools who have 
implemented some STEM initiative (e.g., students project; participation in event etc); #of science and 
technology labs at schools.
Table 27: Information about Action ST2.2.2.2 (Train educators on STEM subjects and pedagogical approaches, 
support them to apply good practices, and equip schools)

5.2.3	SKILLS CAPITAL
5.2.3.1	ACTION 1. PUBLIC UPSKILLING CAMPAIGN FOR AWARENESS, TRUST AND 
DEMOCRATISATION OF AI
It is imperative to increase general public awareness with regards to what AI is about, aiming to gain trust and 
increase activism related to AI democratisation and use. To this end, a public upskilling campaign is suggested, 
aiming to introduce AI at different levels and build the related skills capital. The action should follow a multi-
disciplinary approach to ascertain a holistic view of AI, to allow for the co-creation of more applicable, more 
mature, more acceptable AI technologies, products and practices. Public upskilling should be considered under 
a new institutional establishment, such as the National AI Literacy Project proposed in ST6 as part of the 
National Digital Academy. 
This action should address different groups, (indicatively) as follows:
*	Students and their parents, opening access to existing Greek online courses on AI and ML for both 
children and adults. This target group could also be approached through sub-actions such as AI Olympiad 
participation, learning vouchers and other support measures.
*	Non tech-savvy population: development of reference popularised AI courses that are freely available to 
citizens. The courses should discuss shortcomings, trade-offs and ethical issues as well as educate citizens 
on their rights and ways to actively participate in the active dialogue about ethical, trustworthy and 
democratic AI. A wide range of different application domains should be covered (e.g., health, legal, health, 
financial/banking, tourism, agriculture, energy and logistics among others).
*	The elderly population, so as to build trust with regards to AI automations, especially for home 
monitoring systems (cf. SHAPES EU project deliverables for suggestions). For instance, one can enhance 
existing municipal training sessions for older populations with AI-awareness courses.
*	People with accessibility challenges (cf. EU and National accessibility guidelines) and their careers.
This Action should be seen as part of the broader attempts towards democratising AI detailed in ST6.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST2.3.1: Public upskilling campaign for awareness, trust and democratisation of AI
Action Code: ST2.3.1
Key stakeholders: Wider public, Municipalities, AI Tutors, AI academia, Accessibility-related service 
providers, Elderly-related service providers, Civic society actors, Universities
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M3: definition of target groups
M6: Consultation with stakeholders and finalization of suggested sub-actions
M12: Start of trainings
M24: Report on impact, findings, best practices and suggested next steps
Links to other STs: ST6
Type of action: Informative, educational, operational
Indicative KPIs: # of courses and other material provided; # people reached by the campaign and attending 
relevant courses
Table 28: Information about Action ST2.3.1 (Public upskilling campaign for awareness, trust and 
democratisation of AI)

5.2.3.2	ACTION 2: AI-TRAINING FOR PUBLIC SECTOR EMPLOYEES AND DECISION MAKERS
AI, ML and data analytics - related skills in Public Administration are becoming more and more necessary, 
while at the same time requiring continuous improvement. In addition, the need to develop and provide e-
services to citizens and businesses increases the demand for executives with a higher level of skills related to 
AI services offered by the Public Sector in the future. This action aims to upskill public sector employees and 
decision makers, creating a first set of innovators in the sector, plus creating momentum related to the 
human-centric adoption of AI. Activities under this action should be performed in close synergies with 
responsible/relevant stakeholders of the public sector (e.g., National Centre for Public Administration).
Activities under this action should be performed in close synergies with responsible/relevant stakeholders of 
the public sector as outlined in ST5.4. 
The action should:
*	Equip the public servants with the skills needed to understand and use AI systems and methodologies. 
Create or (re)use online material on AI and incentivise employee certification on this material.
*	Establish cooperation with the Ministry of Interior Affairs and with EKDDA, as a strategic training body for 
civil servants and employees of the Local Authorities, as well as with other respective educational 
institutions in the public and private sector. Through this cooperation, the education and training of public 
sector employees and executives is sought to be in line with the planned National Digital Skills Framework, 
which will be harmonized with the respective European Digital Capacity Framework (DigComp) system in 
conjunction with the DigComputer system. These collaborations will lead to a common framework of 
cooperation, defining the type and form of planning and implementation of training actions for almost all 
civil servants and employees of the Local Authorities. The platform of the Digital Academy of Citizens can 
be the central coordination hub of all digital skills development, with the aim of wide-ranging digital 
actions for the acquisition of digital skills by the public sector, as well as the entire population. More 
specifically, it can act as a "Collaboration Platform" of digital education providers by coordinating, through 
a homogeneous national business logic, the action plan for the acquisition of digital skills related to AI, at 
basic, intermediate, and advanced levels. 
*	Encourage strategic collaborations between public sector departments and research centers / universities 
that excel in AI, so that the public sector employees have a continuous hands-on experience of how AI can 
be used to solve their problems. This interaction is suggested to build on ideathons/hackathons, where co-
creation of ideas and products/services results in innovative, usable blueprints or prototypes. These 
workshops should be structured to address different levels of the public sector hierarchy, to enable 
adopters and enablers horizontally and vertically in public sector processes and services.
*	Implement AI ethics-by-design training events and workshops, to ensure human-centric, ethical outcomes 
and increase trust, sustainability, and adoption of AI in the public sector.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST2.3.2: AI-training for public sector employees and decision makers
Action Code: ST2.3.2
Key stakeholders: Public sector, Municipalities, AI tutors and teaching material creators, AI academia and 
research
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M3: Definition of target groups in thematic priority sectors
M6: Introductory material available
M9: Workshops / ideathons / hackathons (1st thematic priority)
M12:  Workshops / ideathons / hackathons reports (including suggested blueprints/prototypes)
M18: Completion of second round of Workshops / ideathons / hackathons and related reports (2nd 
thematic priority)
M24: Completion of third round of Workshops / ideathons / hackathons (3rd thematic priority)
Links to other STs: ST5, ST1, ST3, ST6
Type of action: Informative, educational, collaboration, operational
Indicative KPIs: # training events organised/training actions (events, workshops); # public organisations 
involved in the training activities; # of public employees who attend relevant upskilling programmes, # of 
trainees; 
Table 29: Information about Action ST2.3.2 (AI-training for public sector employees and decision makers)
5.2.3.3	ACTION 3: AI-TRAINING FOR PRIVATE SECTOR EXECUTIVES AND EMPLOYEES TOWARDS 
STRONGER AI SKILLS
This action aims to upskill private sector employees towards stronger digital competencies and AI, ML and data 
analytics skills. The action should:
*	Run a national reskilling program for Computer Science professionals of all types (software engineers, 
backend/frontend developers, data engineers, etc), that will focus on AI, ML and data analysis skills, under 
an ethics-by-design prism.
*	Focus on employees in other disciplines who want to use some AI technology in their work, like doctors, 
having as goal to help professionals to more effectively use and quickly integrate AI applications in their 
fields of work.
*	Design and implement reskilling/upskilling training programmes for employees that will change their focus 
due to the automation of the job position they have.
*	Help to set continuous learning as one of the basic goals of universities and colleges and provide as many 
as possible opportunities for lifelong learning.  
*	Facilitate research centres, universities and enterprises, active in the fields of cloud computing and AI 
services and infrastructures, to organize short educational workshops, and seminars for companies, so 
that they improve their executives' and employees' AI/ML skills. These workshops should both include 
direct training of the employees and executives, which will also allow for innovative processes with 
regards to their AI/ML needs. 
*	Train-the-trainer programmes, which bring a multidisciplinary skill set into play, allowing decision makers 
in companies and organizations to integrate AI as a strategic aim, which increases sustainability.
*	More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST2.3.3: AI-training for private sector executives and employees towards stronger AI skills
Action Code: ST2.3.3
Key stakeholders: Large Enterprises, SMEs and start-ups
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M3: Definition of thematic areas
M6: Assignment of leaders (universities, research centres and enterprises) per thematic area, undertaking 
the design and implementation of vocational training programmes 
M9: Completion of a 3-month dissemination and communication plan of the skills training programmes in 
all thematic areas
M9: Thematic-area-specific material available
M18: Completion of first round of reskilling program 
M24: Completion of second round of reskilling program 
Links to other STs: ST1, ST3, ST4
Type of action: Informative, educational
Indicative KPIs: # knowledge provider stakeholders involved in the training programmes; # companies 
participating in upskilling programmes; # private employees attending such programmes/# of participating 
companies, # of programmes; # of trainees; 
Table 30: Information about Action ST2.3.3 (AI-training for private sector executives and employees 
towards stronger AI skills)

5.2.3.4	ACTION 4: AI RESKILLING FOR ACADEMIA
The action should:
*	Integrate ethics-by-design, legal concerns and challenges and other multidisciplinary topics to vocational 
training programmes, but also academic research practices.
*	Integrate entrepreneurial skills into academic programmes related to AI. 
*	Integrate non-technical AI-skills such as critical thinking, creativity, problem solving, etc. 
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST2.3.4: AI reskilling for Academia
Action Code: ST2.3.4
Key stakeholders: Universities and research centres
Duration:  24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M6: Finalization of universities and research centres participating in the reskilling programme, depending 
on their expertise 
M6: Run a 3-month dissemination and communication plan of the skills training programmes in all thematic 
areas
M9: Domain-specific material available
M12: Run first round of reskilling program 
M18: Run second round of reskilling program 
Links to other STs: ST1, ST3, ST4
Type of action:  Informative, educational
Indicative KPIs: # participating universities and research centres; # courses and other material on non-
technical aspects available; # participants in the reskilling program, # of trainees; # of disciplines of 
participants; # of training actions
Table 31: Information about Action ST2.3.4 (AI reskilling for Academia)

 

6.	STRATEGIC TARGET 3 (ST3): NATIONAL AI INNOVATION ECOSYSTEM
6.1	OVERVIEW OF EXISTING INITIATIVES AT A NATIONAL LEVEL 
Innovation is a key component for societal and financial evolution and development, making the strengthening 
of innovation a challenge for greater prosperity and better lives. The innovation landscape in Greece 
demonstrates remarkable dynamics during the last decade, with the appearance of various related initiatives 
and actions that have formed the current innovation ecosystem. In the following paragraphs we overview this 
ecosystem, by referring to representative stakeholders, initiatives, networks, and actions, while focusing on 
the AI-related aspects as appropriate. To facilitate the reader, we provide two different viewpoints: (a) the AI 
Innovation Ecosystem Creation aspect, focusing on facts that have allowed the current ecosystem; (b) the AI 
Innovation Ecosystem Sustainability aspect, which highlights actions that will allow this ecosystem to be 
sustainable over time.

6.1.1	AI INNOVATION ECOSYSTEM CREATION
Our overview starts from a main component of innovation in Greece: the vibrant Greek start-up ecosystem. 
According to market professionals, the capitalization of Greek-owned start-ups is estimated at €3.5 billion, up 
from €2.5 billion last year and zero just eight years back. This ecosystem is monitored by official platforms, 
such as Elevate Greece. Elevate Greece is the official platform and leading resource for in-depth information 
on the Greek Startup Ecosystem, aspiring to help it grow and expand. It includes a database of registered 
Centres and information on the innovation ecosystem. A number of facts illustrate a growth tendency in 
innovative actions at a local, but also national level. In 2018, Athens was awarded the "European Capital of 
Innovation 2018" and received 1M Euros prize (EU). We should also note that, according to "Centres in 
Greece", Athens was ranked 3% higher than last year in the category of "Founders' Choice", while it also has 
the highest ranking in the category "Value for Money" as a startup hub". A step further, big companies, such as 
Tesla, Pfizer and EY, have invested in Greece to establish innovative R&D departments and hubs, highlighting 
the underlying potential. Other companies' newly established Greek branches actively seek collaborations with 
research laboratories and/or companies for jointly developing application specific AI technology (e.g., OHB 
Hellas for space applications).
Technology parks, such as the Science and Technology Park of Crete (STEP-C), Patras Science Park (PSP), 
Lefkippos Technology Park, and others, have played a major role in the creation of such potential, offering 
fertile research and development grounds, usually in close collaboration with research and academic 
institutions. Technology parks in addition to hosting services provide incubation services, guiding the newly 
founded SMEs in their first steps towards growth.
An integral part of the innovation ecosystem in Greece is the dedicated incubator and accelerator community, 
oftentimes paired with co-working spaces. From EGG, Corallia, and Metavallon Incubator to "The Cube", 
Found.ation and i4G, there exists a remarkable spectrum of innovation support mechanisms, empowering 
Centres and scale-ups alike. In most cases these incubators collaborate closely with VC funds and business 
angels facilitating the early-stage financing of start-ups.
There exists a number of support mechanisms and Networks that provide further opportunities and assistance 
to start-ups, aiming to establish connections with industries, enable technology transfer and help them 
internationalise.  Bridging functions between industry and research are also performed by innovation-related 
networks and organisations. 
A powerful addition to the innovation ecosystem arsenal, is that of Digital Innovation Hubs (DIH) and 
Competence Centres.  These hubs (e.g., the data-, AI- and IoT-oriented "ahedd" DIH in NCSR "Demokritos" or 
the DIH-NTUA), together with innovation offices of academic organizations and universities, function as key 
enablers for the integration of research outcomes and know-how into innovative enterprises. European-level 
DIHs (such as the planned agrofood-related DIH in central Macedonia, or the planned SmartHealth DIH led by 
FORTH) are also significant initiatives in the Greek innovation landscape.
The Enterprise Europe Network (EEN) launched in 2008, is the largest pan-European support infrastructure for 
SMEs, Centres and scale-ups, focusing on partnering and consulting services on innovation, 
internationalisation and access to finance. The Network comprises 3500 local experts, on 600 locations 
covering more than 63 countries worldwide that connect innovation support agents across Europe and 
beyond. PRAXI Network coordinates the Greek branch of the Network, the Enterprise Europe Network - Hellas 
(www.een.gr) and chairs EEN's pan European ICT sector group. 
The National Contact Points (NCP) network is composed of nationally designated experts which specialise in 
the details and modalities of the European Commission's Framework Programmes for Research and 
Innovation. NCPs provide support for entities wishing to apply for FP programme funding. National Contact 
Points are organised thematically and form pan-European thematic NCP networks, sharing expertise and 
experience and connecting actors internationally. ICT has a dedicated NCP specialising on various subareas 
including Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning.
Enterprise Greece is another support structure aiming to facilitate the extroversion of Greek enterprises and 
the attraction of foreign investments in the Greek economy and businesses. 
Finally, Innovation offices such as PRAXI Network, provide advisory and partnering services towards SMEs, 
focusing in the areas of access to finance, innovation management, IPR and digital transformation. Utilising 
international connections and participation in transnational networks, innovation offices also provide 
partnering opportunities for innovation co-development and IPR commercialisation.
In addition to formally established support structures, one should note a number of emerged open or informal 
communities which have developed as a result of the AI- and data-related innovation opportunities and 
challenges that arise in Greece. From the Hellenic Free Open Source Software Community (ELLAK) -with its 
significant history and contribution to open innovation-, to the Greek branch of the MyData community and 
the enthusiasts' meetup groups (e.g., the Deep Learning Meetup community or the Athens AI Meetup 
community, which number hundreds of members), grassroot movements almost complete the puzzle of main 
stakeholders regarding the Innovation Ecosystem Creation aspect of this overview. 
Another issue of critical importance is that of legislation. To empower the above vibrant communities, by 
improving its low score on the innovation-friendly environment metrics (EIS, 2020), Greece has initiated 
several actions to tackle existing challenges, such as a bill to simplify the licensing of business activities 
(Minister of Development and Investment, Nov 2020).
Based on the above analysis, the current state of the Greek innovation ecosystem combines promising 
dynamics, with facilitating support actions, which - combined with appropriate infrastructure and training (as 
per Strategic Targets 1 and 2), as well as sustainability actions - can foster a fertile AI innovation environment. 
The combination of this fertility with ethical considerations under a democratic perspective (Strategic Target 6) 
is expected to maximize the impact of all related innovative endeavours to the wider community, under a 
human-centric perspective.

6.1.2	AI INNOVATION ECOSYSTEM SUSTAINABILITY
As noted in the previous paragraphs, the creation and development of an ecosystem can be significantly 
hindered if sustainability actions are not undertaken. In this part of the overview, we focus on such actions, 
covering different aspects of sustainability. First, we refer to critical funding possibilities and related sources. 
Then, we discuss the public awareness and training aspect of sustainability, which increases the understanding 
of AI and its impact across different domains of application, building tomorrow's capital. Finally, we note 
national policy innovation sustainability actions.
Concerning funding, during the last few years a number of important initiatives have supported the Greek 
innovation ecosystem, including AI-enabled settings. 
On the private funding side, the establishment of Equifund, a fund of funds launched by the Hellenic Republic 
in cooperation with the European Investment Fund (EIF), is a primary source of financing, boasting a significant 
funding portfolio and collaborating funding entities, but one can find additional Private Equity and VC 
initiatives, such as Openfund and Brookstreet equity. 
Other private funding includes, of course, efforts such as the investment of big enterprises in R&D within the 
Greek borders (such as the EY, Pfizer and related cases described above). We also identify actions related to 
Corporate Social Responsibility (e.g., the case of Eurobank), or domain specific innovation competitions (e.g., 
FinQuest by Alpha Bank), including investment for internal innovation actions (e.g., COSMOTE InnovatiON).
On the public funding side, both national and international opportunities for start-ups exist through various 
programmes. Research and Innovation funding comes mainly from national programmes, launched by the 
General Secretariat for Research and Technology (GSRT) such as the "RESEARCH - CREATE - INNOVATE'' 
actions, or regional programmes such as the Research and Innovation Synergies in Attica. All regions have 
dedicated programmes and actions focusing on R&I activities for SMEs relating to their RIS3 strategy. Bilateral 
programmes between Greece and other nations (e.g., Israel and Germany) provide additional funding 
opportunities and promote transnational cooperation for innovation development.
At the EU level, the European Commission's Framework Programmes are the key European funding 
instruments for research and innovation activities in Europe. They cover all areas of science and technology 
and through specialised committees adjust and update the programmes according to scientific, technological 
and market trends. In its current Programme, Horizon 2020 and its subsequent one from 2021, Horizon 
Europe, Artificial Intelligence has entered strongly as a subject in dedicated calls. AI funding is mainly realised 
through three main instruments: the European Research Council (ERC) which funds promising, early stage 
research with the aim to develop further the state of the art and establish leadership in a technological or 
scientific field, the  European Innovation Council (EIC) which provides funding to innovators aiming to bring to 
the market breakthrough technologies and solutions and the Public-private partnerships (PPPs) which will 
facilitate stepping up private investment.  It is important to note that there is a significant number of Greek 
stakeholders active in the field of AI, who managed to compete internationally and secure funding from the 
European Commission. In Horizon 2020, and for calls related to AI, there were 148 participations in 87 funded 
projects (signed grants) securing in excess of 45.9 million euros.  Although the highest participation was from 
Universities and RTOs, more than a third of participants were SMEs.
Another EU initiative comes from the EIT Digital action, which includes an "Innovation Factory", an 
"Entrepreneurial Academy" and an accelerator. Within the European Economic Area, one can find additional 
funding opportunities for Greek innovators, such as the EEA Grants.
In the area of national defence, which is among the priorities for Greece, a host of AI projects and initiatives 
are expected to be funded by the European Defence Agency (EDA).
Beyond funding, AI innovation sustainability requires AI-aware thought leaders and pioneers in all aspects of 
societal and financial action. The emergence of such individuals builds upon public awareness events and 
training seminars or workshops. In Greece there exist a number of related actions. Hackathons, matchathons, 
ideathons and other related events have taken place, covering a variety of domains from health (e.g., 
https://www.euvsvirus.org/) to fintech, social innovation and agrotech among others.
On the other hand, series of public seminars (e.g., from NCSR "Demokritos", SciFY Academy, Laskarides 
Foundation seminars in collaboration with the Hellenic AI Society, EETN) increase awareness of the AI potential 
horizontally, while domain-specific conferences and workshops allow cross-fertilization between the AI 
experts' community and a number of industries (e.g., see SETN's 2020 workshops on "Law and AI", "AI and 
Physical Sciences", "Games and AI"), catalysing innovation.
Recently, the osmosis between research centres and innovative firms has been significantly strengthened by 
the inauguration of "industrial PhD" programmes (e.g., see the corresponding action of NCSR "Demokritos"). 
These programs allow the design and application of cutting-edge AI (e.g., deep reinforcement learning, XAI) in 
a multitude of domains, from material science to robotics, the IoT and the Semantic Web. Finally, our overview 
indicated a limited but important set of vocational training actions on innovation (see for example the 
corresponding courses on the e-learning platform of the National and Kapodistrian University of Athens), but 
also targeted executive trainings by research institutions towards enterprises and Centres (see the NCSR 
"Demokritos" ahedd custom workshops). 
Once again, at this point, we highlight national policies that can empower sustainability in AI innovation. 
Within the national digital policies, including the development planning and regulatory legislation, innovation 
gets increased support. This fact is coupled by the bill to simplify the licensing of business activities (Minister of 
Development and Investment, Nov 2020), facilitating innovative entrepreneurship. However, AI can also 
empower social innovation. To this end, public organizations have already participated in innovation actions 
(e.g., the Ministry of Work and Social affairs led a Greek consortium for the EU "Competence centres for social 
innovation" call), indicating government commitment to a wider innovation scope.

6.1.3	SUMMARY OF OPPORTUNITIES AND IMPROVEMENT POINTS
Based on the above overview and several studies published during the last few years, we identify several 
opportunities and potential improvements that can empower AI-related innovation.
Given the numerous AI innovators with success stories across domains - including big firms that strategically 
invest in AI [BCG20] - the world-class AI expertise, and the existing successful innovating spin-offs and Centres, 
one would need to increase the experimentation potential on AI technologies, in a pre-deployment, controlled 
setting (see also the EC-proposed TEFs). Such action could reduce the time-to-market and reduce ethics and 
adoption-related risks. This action could also exploit the role of big AI firms, which understand the potential of 
AI and need to strategically invest in related endeavours (BCG, 2020; Accenture, 2019) to lead to a network of 
early adopters across different domains. We expect that this could also push businesses and organizations 
(including civil society representatives) towards more prompt digitization, to increase the degree of digitization 
which currently remains low.
As a second opportunity, the recent inauguration of MSc programmes in AI, Data Science and related domains 
with significant participation from companies could lead to an increase in AI research results. Industrial PhDs 
could play also a key role in the collaboration between academia and industry. Since Greece lags in the 
exploitation of research results as company assets, due among other things to the limited connection between 
high-calibre knowledge holders (PhDs) and the industry, it would be wise to employ a nation-wide technology-
transfer effort, which would strategically support exploitation of scientific results. Such effort would need to 
build upon efficient processes aiming for the open and/or commercial exploitation of research results.
Another important step would be to empower large, state-owned enterprises with AI innovation to increase 
their sustainability and provide improved services to their wide clientele, maximizing the impact of AI.
Another opportunity is based on that Greece has a high score on innovative SMEs collaborating with others 
and SMEs innovating in-house (EIS, 2020). This potential could fuel a national AI marketplace, aligned to 
European initiatives such as AI4EU, to allow efficient (re)use of AI components in multiple settings, products, 
and services.
The above actions need to build on an efficient ecosystem monitoring mechanism, which will support 
informed decisions by all stakeholders through open reporting and information sharing. Such action could also 
be combined with the co-creation and leveraging of national support mechanisms for sustainability, through 
the involvement of key stakeholders. The aim would be to create strategically appropriate financing options 
and raise awareness for these options to innovators and related organizations and bodies, ascertaining 
sustainability over time. 

6.2	ST3 ACTIONS PLAN
6.2.1	AI INNOVATION ECOSYSTEM CREATION
6.2.1.1	ACTION 1: NATIONAL AI INNOVATION PROCESSES AND REGISTRY
Given the low research asset generation (e.g., patents), DIH (and innovation offices where available) will create 
a portfolio of AI-related technologies - in close collaboration with the academia and the industry - and aim for 
joint patent (including non-aggressive patents for public use, or open) submissions, under private-public 
funding. The expected outcome would be:
*	A process identifying innovation opportunities, supporting academia and companies to create AI 
intellectual property (IP) assets, each directly mapped to innovative organizations with commercial 
capacity (including SMEs, spin-offs, but also existing big players, as well as social innovators).
*	An online, openly available registry of the above opportunities, allowing efficient management of the 
related data and facilitating mapping to the industry.
*	A co-funding for the IP assets generation to strengthen exploitation.
*	A sustainability plan for the registry, to allow operation beyond the end of the project.
In the mid- and long-term the registry is meant to enhance exploitation capabilities to the wider research and 
innovation ecosystem, also providing policy suggestions to improve the current legal environment. It is also 
meant to identify horizontal AI opportunities for innovation in the public and private sector, and catalyse the 
innovation process by decreasing time-to-market.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST3.1: National AI innovation Processes and Registry
Action Code: ST3.1
Key stakeholders: DIH, Universities and Research Centres (esp. innovation offices), Innovation Clusters, 
Companies
Duration:  18 months
Indicative Milestones:
Month 6: Agreed process and supporting (physical and digital) resources in place
Month 18: First 100 IP assets (indicative number; to be finalized); sustainability plan for the registry beyond 
the end of the project.
Links to other STs: ST2, ST4
Type of action:  Financing, Operational
Indicative KPIs: Number of IP assets (e.g., patents, license agreements); Number of research groups 
supported; Number of commercial capacity organizations supported
Table 32: Information about Action ST3.1 (National AI innovation Processes and Registry)

6.2.1.2	ACTION 2: AI TESTING AND EXPERIMENTATION FACILITIES
AI ideas and products need to be able to mature in semi-controlled, realistic environments, to allow for a 
human-centric, ethics-by-design, but also efficient development, implementation and deployment. We 
propose (cf. "Democratising AI" white paper) AI Testing and Experimentation Facilities (TEFs) at a local, 
regional and national scale, which will constitute the controlled environments where AI innovations can be co-
created, evaluated and matured, in order to minimize risks, maximize positive impact and ascertain socio-
cultural compatibility with the deployment settings.
The TEFs could be directly linked to existing Digital Innovation Hub facilities - especially living labs settings -, 
technology parks, incubators and accelerators, to maximize the impact and allow for cross-fertilization and 
maturing of best practices. 
The TEFs should also be accessible to a representative set of non-experts and multidisciplinary experts, so that 
AI products can converge to socio-culturally acceptable and impactful assets. Thus, innovation requirements 
could evolve to include cutting-edge explainable AI (XAI) solutions, democratized AI products through AutoML 
approaches, as well as safe, secure and transparent products and services, building on the mitigation of data 
and AI biases, as well as taking into account the AI-cybersecurity dipole and related challenges. Finally, these 
TEFs could be a setting for the implementation of theses (BSc, MSc, PhD) of different disciplines, providing 
insights on large scale application of AI technologies, the related challenges and possible solutions. Essentially 
the action includes:
*	The definition of priority thematic domains (in alignment to the existing priorities of the strategy), 
together with appropriate stakeholders, utilizing novel infrastructures (e.g., 5G for real-time AIoT 
applications).
*	The initiation and funding of pilot TEFs, in selected appropriate environments and settings, possibly 
through innovation vouchers.
*	The execution of dissemination actions, through fora aiming at the convergence of the pilots.
*	The sharing of results and related best practices for the evolution of TEFs.
In the mid-term and long-term these TEFs are meant to be innovation enablers and points of reference, 
sharing the gained expertise in innovative experimentation with the wider community. The gained expertise 
could also be invaluable within the scope of trans-national initiatives, spanning e.g., all the EU, supporting the 
efficient democratisation of AI.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST3.2: AI Testing and Experimentation Facilities
Action Code: ST3.2
Key stakeholders: Companies, Technology parks, DIH, Universities and Research Centres, Incubators, 
Accelerators, Civil Society
Duration: 18 months
Indicative Milestones:
Month 6: Initiation of TEF pilots, one per thematic domain of priority
Month 18: Results and best practices report 
Links to other STs: ST1 (incl. strong synergies with ST1.5), ST2, ST6  
Type of action:  Operational, Financing, Dissemination
Indicative KPIs: Number of products through the pipeline; Number of organizations supported; Number of 
theses/reports generated; Number of products reach the market after incubation
Table 33: Information about Action ST3.2 (AI Testing and Experimentation Facilities)

6.2.1.3	ACTION 3: LARGE STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISES IN AI-PLAY
The aim of the action is to incentivize large state-owned enterprises to delve into their data silos and launch 
calls asking for AI-based solutions on well-defined problems (e.g., see the related EYDAP initiative). These calls 
will help these enterprises to reshape the traditional revenue models, create new products and better services 
for their clients, and improve their operational cost base. Such action will incentivize start-ups and individual 
entrepreneurs to participate. 
The action can be broken down to individual steps, as follows:
*	Identification and summary of datasets available per enterprise.
*	Organization of ideation events (e.g., ideathons) to converge to possible AI-enabled uses of the datasets 
(whether internal or by third parties) for the provision of new products and services, improvement of 
current services or innovation within the enterprise. Such events should ideally be multi-disciplinary, to 
allow a human-centric exploration of the potential of cutting-edge AI results over the spectrum of 
operations, such as: AIoT and digital twins for proactive maintenance and network optimization; deep 
neural models and AI-powered dialogue systems (chatbots) for efficient knowledge management and 
customer support; reinforcement learning and motion planning for optimized HMI; edge AI for 
autonomous driving or safety and security settings, etc.
*	Calls for pilot implementations, funding SMEs, industrial players, research groups, or other innovative 
teams to run pilots, based on the predefined ideas.
*	Share the outcome of the pilots, both as case studies and best practices.
In the mid- and long-term this action can be combined with Action ST3.2 (Testing and Experimentation 
Facilities) to further develop the successful pilot outcomes. It should also aim at the creation of new paradigms 
of data sharing (e.g., sectoral data spaces) for the empowerment of all related stakeholders (including 
enterprises, data analysts, researchers, etc.). Finally, the action is expected to contribute to an AI-aware 
culture beyond the borders of the large state-owned enterprises through success stories, but also challenges 
faced and best practices.
The action pay emphasis in the active engagement of the large state-owned enterprises in the National AI 
ecosystem, given that some of these enterprises possess large datasets and can directly benefits from 
innovative solutions to business problems (e.g., increasing their resilience). Nevertheless, the action could be 
directly extended to private sector enterprises in data-intensive industries that produced very large datasets, 
which currently remain largely unexploited.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST3.3: Large state-owned enterprises in AI-play
Action Code: ST3.3
Key stakeholders: Large state-owned enterprises, individual entrepreneurs and developers, Centres, 
academic and research organizations.
Duration:  24 months
Indicative Milestones:
Month 12: 1st Call launch
Month 18: Results of 1st Call and 2nd Call launch
Month 24: Results of 2nd Call
Links to other STs: ST1, ST2, ST5, ST6
Type of action:  Networking, Funding
Indicative KPIs: Number of enterprises participating; Number of theses/reports generated; Number of 
companies participating in the calls; Number of products adopted
Table 34: Information about Action ST3.3 (Large state-owned enterprises in AI-play)

6.2.1.4	ACTION 4: AI INNOVATION NETWORK: BRIDGING CENTRES AND SMES
Large companies scan the business environment to identify and exploit innovative ideas developed in Centres, 
outside their established businesses. At the same time, start-ups seek support from large companies due to 
their strong boosting effect. Although much of the focus is on collaboration between start-ups and large 
companies, SMEs could support and collaborate with more start-ups than large companies do, due to their 
agility and innovation capacity. Also, SMEs could enhance their innovation process with limited investments. 
SMEs should be incentivized to launch systematic, collaborative activity (contractually defined) with Centres, 
and encourage the collaborative development of innovative solutions. Also, Incubators/Accelerators should 
focus more on making the identification of SMEs as possible users of new technologies more accessible to 
start-ups, as well as making start-ups more identifiable by SMEs.
This action can be elaborated into the following steps:
*	Recording of existing skillsets and innovation capacity of SMEs, as well as their market.
*	Recording of start-up orientation, skillsets and innovation assets, building also on the "Elevate Greece".
*	An AI-enabled match-making platform, containing the gathered information above and suggesting 
potential collaborations between complementary or otherwise aligned SMEs and start-ups.
*	Co-investment on common development of enabling technologies, products and services, possibly co-
funded by "innovative collaboration" vouchers.
In the mid-term, the action aims to contribute to a collaboration culture, acting as a multiplication factor to 
individual investments. This could also help support innovation actions across sectors, where the 
transferability of lessons learnt in one domain of application can significantly reduce the time-to-market for a 
similar domain. Finally, this action is expected to incentivize an entrepreneurial spirit, increasing the impact of 
Centres and pre-existing SMEs alike, in a highly competitive environment.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST3.4: AI Innovation Network: Bridging Centres and SMEs
Action Code: ST3.4
Key stakeholders: Innovation networks, SMEs, Centres, Incubators, Accelerators, Chambers of Commerce
Duration:  24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M3: Start-up and skill-set registries of interested parties complete
M6: Matchmaking platform operational and related dissemination activities
M12: First set of co-funded contracts/initiatives
M24: Second set of co-funded contracts/initiatives
Links to other STs: ST1, ST2, ST4, ST6
Type of action: Networking, Funding  
Indicative KPIs: Number of contracts defined; number of member companies
Table 35: Information about Action ST3.4 (AI Innovation Network: Bridging Centres and SMEs)

6.2.1.5	ACTION 5: A NATIONAL AI MARKETPLACE 
The action aims to develop a distributed AI Marketplace for algorithms, data, AI applications, AI solutions and 
services (demand and supply of diverse AI services) as a national open collaboration platform on AI, 
complementary to international related efforts (e.g., AI4EU). The platform will integrate a wide range of 
diverse, crowd-driven (citizen, research & academia, private and public sectors) AI algorithms, datasets and AI 
solutions, which will be offered to the community. These assets should also include linguistic resources, 
supporting the analysis and use of the Greek language in AI pipelines.
A distinct aspect of this platform will be the 'AI innovation start-up Hub' that will provide an overview of the AI 
tools, applications and services that have been created at a National level. In order to foster trust in this online 
platform, audit mechanisms (technical, ethical, etc.) will be established in order to ensure the necessary multi-
thematic standards, which can be complemented via community-driven reputation mechanisms. Security 
aspects will be ensured as well as accessibility, openness and inclusivity of diverse stakeholder segments.
This AI Marketplace will foster collaboration and co-creation of diverse ecosystem actors. It will act as one 
stop-shop at a national level for AI related services (provision and trading) and will provide a range of 
innovation support services (business, technical support, training, etc.) across lifecycle stages of AI-driven 
innovation for individual entrepreneurs, Centres and scale-ups in addition to SMEs and larger companies 
(across their digital and AI transformation journeys). This platform could form the basis for fostering active 
collaboration, establish partnerships and new AI collaborative projects/initiatives (with high potential 
economic impact, social impact, environmental/sustainability impact) between research, academia, Centres, 
investors and funds, private sector and public sector entities in Greece and in the broader South East Europe.
This platform can be part of the 'Elevate Greece' platform and strengthen its cause, that is to make Greece the 
next major hub in innovation in South East Europe. Potentially, the AI marketplace could be established as a 
form of Public Private Partnership (PPP), combining the best of the public and private sector to the benefit of 
all.
In the medium and long term, this marketplace could integrate separate sector-specific AI Marketplaces and 
hubs (i.e., Health, Manufacturing, Maritime, Tourism, Agriculture, etc), addressing the needs of distinct 
communities and stakeholders. Furthermore, an AI-powered digital transformation hub could also be created 
in order to assist companies lagging behind in their digital transformation journeys by providing the necessary 
AI tools, services and support. 
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST3.5: A National AI Marketplace
Action Code: ST3.5
Key stakeholders: Individual entrepreneurs and developers, Centres, private sector, public sector, research 
and academia, investors, policy makers
Duration:  Continuous i.e. Active throughout the Strategy's implementation
Indicative Milestones:
M6 infrastructure in place 
Links to other STs: ST1, ST2
Type of action: Networking, Infrastructure, Funding  
Indicative KPIs: Number of organizations interacting in the market; number of contributed algorithms; 
number of size of contributed data; value of products/services/etc. provided through the marketplace; 
number of projects initiated through the platform
Table 36: Information about Action ST3.5 (A National AI Marketplace)

6.2.2	ACTION 6: NATIONAL TECHNOLOGY-TRANSFER EFFORT
For existing research groups in the areas of AI, there needs to be a national strategy in place in order to 
commercially exploit mature research results either through technology transfer activities or through the 
assistance and establishment of spin-offs or new start-ups.
In addition to the particularly important scientific findings of the research, part of this action is also the 
development of know-how, innovative technological processes, original devices and final products which 
constitute the Intellectual Property of research institutes and can be further utilized offering a significant 
benefit to the development and prosperity of the wider society as a whole.
Utilization of the results of the research activity carried out at research institutes, that is, the Intellectual 
Property of research institutes, for the benefit and use of the wider society, is one of the most important 
components of research and social policy of the institution. It is a key axis of his social contribution, as -
through the transfer of knowledge to production- part of public resources spent on research returns to society, 
creating added value.
This contribution is implemented in many ways, such as:
*	The transfer of new knowledge to the undergraduate and postgraduate students of the institution.
*	The publication of the research results in Greek and International scientific magazines and conferences.
*	The provision of technical advice to the State and the institutionalized bodies of.
*	The provision of technical advice and support to Greek and foreign companies
*	The patenting of original methods-technologies-products with patents.
*	Concluding contracts for the transfer or use of technology with existing companies or spin-offs.
It is therefore clear that the scope of cooperation between research institutes and industry, can be developed 
in a wide range of activities: by Research & Technological Development, the development of innovation and 
new entrepreneurship, Technology transfer, but also Training in issues related to innovation management, 
productive systems, innovation systems and more broadly industrial development and technological change.
This action is an umbrella strategic planning action, aiming to form the appropriate overall landscape of AI-
related innovation in Greece in the mid- and long-term.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST3.6: National Technology-Transfer Effort 
Action Code: ST3.6
Key stakeholders: Research institutes, Innovation offices, Technology transfer offices, early-stage VC 
funding
Duration:  24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M6 Liaisons with existing VC funds operating in Greece or funding Greek enterprises
M12 Activation of TTOs in major Greek universities and R&D centres
Links to other STs: ST2
Type of action:  
Indicative KPIs: Number of events organized; number of new TTOs
Table 37: Information about Action ST3.6 (National Technology-Transfer Effort) 
6.2.3	AI INNOVATION ECOSYSTEM SUSTAINABILITY
6.2.3.1	ACTION 7: A NETWORK OF EARLY ADOPTERS 
Established pre-existing practices, as is the case of the Israeli AI strategy, aims to create a network of early 
adopters for AI technologies, utilizing appropriate pre-existing environments (e.g., smart cities) to test various 
disruptive AI innovations, such as autonomous cars, etc. 
Since innovation is about bringing inventions out to society and making them have an impact, it is important 
for companies to have access to a proper environment to try out things, namely the aforementioned Testing 
and Experimentation Facilities (TEFs). However, a second level of application for the successful outcomes of 
the TEFs if that of the real world environment. But such an environment is built step-by-step and this is what 
this action aims at. 
The preparation of a fertile innovation environment involves a significant cultural shift, since people, 
organizations, and the society overall will have to be willing to co-create the final AI systems, or even 
collaborate with AI, in an Augmented Intelligence setting. Greece can promote this shift by building and 
nurturing a network of people, companies, and organizations (even cities, such as Trikala, Karditsa, Chalkida 
and others) that are more prone and ready to adopt new technologies and test innovations, facing the 
challenges of innovation fine-tuning and customization for the specific community.
The network could utilize a common infrastructure with Action 4 (AI Innovation Network), starting as a registry 
and providing a tool to make the connections between innovators and early adopters easier. Early adopters 
should be recognized and rewarded for participating in this, e.g., through innovation vouchers to lower any 
related entry barriers.
In the mid-term this network of early adopters is meant to mature the wider eco-system, through sharing the 
gained know-how, identifying common pitfalls and challenges as well as the related mitigation actions. 
Furthermore, it will create the critical mass of innovators and thought leaders in the society, in conjunction 
with training actions of ST2, to build a powerful and democratic (cf. ST6) AI-aware society. 
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST3.7: A Network of Early Adopters
Action Code: ST3.7
Key stakeholders: Ministry of development and investments, Large companies, SMEs, municipalities, start-
ups, research and academia.
Duration:  24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M6: registry and matchmaking tools 
Links to other STs: ST1, ST2, ST4, ST5, ST6
Type of action:  Networking, Funding
Indicative KPIs: Number of public organizations participating; number of companies participating
Table 38: Information about Action ST3.7 (A Network of Early Adopters)

6.2.3.2	ACTION 8: AI INNOVATION ECOSYSTEM OBSERVATORY
In order to ascertain a sustainable ecosystem, one needs to identify key stakeholders, innovative players, the 
related existing and desired skillset, as well as opportunities (including funding) and challenges that arise over 
time. To this end, we suggest an AI Observatory action, the aim of which is to gather information on the AI 
innovation ecosystem, forming an iteratively updated outline of the - constantly changing - network of 
stakeholders. 
The action should aim at providing (and appropriately disseminating) periodic reports on the findings, 
essentially offering a constant, trustworthy information source for challenges and opportunities on all 
innovation aspects of AI, such as (non-exhaustively): (a) Innovative AI systems and services; (b) AI adoption; (c) 
Public trust and understanding of AI; (d) Funding; (e) International initiatives.
This action could orchestrate information gathering from different stakeholder groups, consolidating and 
sharing this information to facilitate efficient and effective AI-related innovation. It should also align national 
reports to other related, international initiatives, e.g., the EU SME Focus Group on AI, related EU projects, 
Social Innovation schemes, etc. 
In the long run, this action aims to constitute a major point of reference for the innovative aspects of AI, 
covering numerous of the required points of view and perspectives. As such, it will be an invaluable resource 
for informed decision making at all policy making levels (including enterprise decision making).
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST3.8: AI Innovation Ecosystem Observatory 
Action Code: ST3.8
Key stakeholders: Public and private bodies related to innovation (incl. innovation monitoring); Professional 
and sectoral associations; Innovation offices; DIH; Incubators, accelerators; Funding bodies
Duration:  24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M6: Initiation of public portal on AI innovation monitoring
M12, M24: Yearly report on AI ecosystem (and dissemination event) 
Links to other STs: ST1, ST2, ST4, ST5
Type of action:  Funding
Indicative KPIs: Number of reports on AI innovation in Greece; Number of sectors monitored; Number of 
stakeholders identified and recorded
Table 39: Information about Action ST3.8 (AI Innovation Ecosystem Observatory)

6.2.3.3	ACTION 9: LEVERAGING NATIONAL SUPPORT MECHANISMS FOR SUSTAINABILITY
Access to Finance options and Access to Finance strategies can be co-developed with the assistance of key 
stakeholders, which have been supporting SMEs on this front for years. Efforts should also focus on attracting 
private funds to invest in Greece. To achieve this a mapping and promotional strategy is needed, running key 
events to raise awareness of such mechanisms and the kind of support they provide. 
At the same time, changes in legislation are required in order to create an investor-friendly environment. Such 
changes concern a stable taxation system, modern IPR management legislation with provisions for AI-create 
IPR, alignment with European policies.
This action aims to utilize gathered information from other ST3 actions (e.g., Action 8 - AI Innovation 
Ecosystem Observatory) to design and implement awareness-raising events and matchmaking events, that will 
foster both:
*	The attraction of private funds to AI-powered Centres, spin-offs, SMEs but also big AI-aware companies.
*	The maturing of the current legislative environment to facilitate and incentivize such investments.
In the mid-term, the action is meant to create a fertile and friendly investment landscape for AI innovation 
efforts, maximizing the value and attractiveness of the Greek AI eco-system as an entrepreneurial setting.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST3.9: Leveraging national support mechanisms for sustainability
Action Code: ST3.9
Key stakeholders: Innovation offices, Technology transfer offices, the Enterprise Europe Network, The 
National Contact Points for Horizon Europe
Duration:  24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M12 First report on the events and their findings, including: policy suggestions; reach and impact 
assessments for the events.
M24 Second year reports (as above)
Links to other STs: ST2, ST4, ST6
Type of action:  Funding
Indicative KPIs: Number of awareness-raising events; number of matchmaking events; number of reports / 
policy suggestions; reach and impact over time
Table 40: Information about Action ST3.9 (Leveraging national support mechanisms for sustainability)


 
7.	STRATEGIC TARGET 4 (ST4): AI FOR THE PRIVATE SECTOR
7.1	OVERVIEW
7.1.1	INTRODUCTION AND IMPORTANCE OF ST4
The objective of this Strategic Target is to accelerate the adoption, development and integration of AI solutions 
in the private sector as an enabler of digital transformation and sustainable economic growth. 
This strategic target will be achieved by the implementation of several strategic actions, which aim to increase 
private sector awareness on AI, provide incentives and support mechanisms for the use of AI by all sectors and 
types of companies.
The strategic actions to be adopted need to take into consideration both the opportunities as well as the 
challenges lying ahead and how these should be best overcome, while at the same time managing effectively 
and proactively all associated risks. These challenges could be categorized in legislative/regulatory, technical, 
commercial/operational, related to trust, among others.
Overall, the private sector needs to ensure that AI is placed at the service of the people, the society and the 
environment, being democratic, trustworthy and sustainable for all for the shared common good.

7.1.2	EXISTING AI-RELATED PRIVATE SECTOR INITIATIVES
AI adoption is hurdled by the overall low digital maturity of Greece (refer to DESI -Digital Economy and Society 
Index). In that respect and if no actions are taken the projected economic growth that AI can infuse into the 
Greek economy in the upcoming years will be low compared to other countries, as illustrated in a recent 
research report by Accenture and Frontier Economics that focused on projections for the period 2020-2035. 
At the same time both the public and the private sector have already started smaller or bigger activities 
towards the use and adoption of AI technologies in solving society's complex problems. 
Especially large corporates from various sectors as Financial Services, Telecommunications, Manufacturing, 
Power and Utilities, etc. that do own large data sets have started using AI in areas as customer interaction 
(chatbots, voice assistants, etc.), marketing (providing personalized content or offers), operations (preventive 
maintenance, process automation with combined use of AI and Robotic Process Automation - in standardized 
processes with low to medium technical integration complexity), risk assessment, fraud detection, and overall 
decision support. Indicative use cases are mentioned in the Table 41 below. Overall, the investment and effort 
is focused mainly in setting the foundations, thus in data governance, data and platforms infrastructure set up 
and interaction, big data lake hydration, as well as operationalization of AI use cases.  As a subsequent step, 
large organizations seek the right path to establish organizational readiness and efficiency in terms of building 
awareness on how AI can benefit all organizational functions, acting with agility, and creating the needed skill 
sets.  
The awareness gap is much wider in Small to Medium Enterprises, where decision makers and employees are 
missing business and technical knowledge, and clear guidelines on the ethical use of AI adoption. This limits 
SMEs investment and experimentation appetite towards AI (even in the "simple" AI solutions).
At the same time, there are stronger positive signs coming for early and mature (Greek) Centres that based on 
AI created successful business models e.g., Workable, Innoetics, Persado.
Lastly international organizations invest in locating regional Digital solution hubs in Greece as Pfizer's Digital 
Hub in Thessaloniki, EY's CESA Data & Analytics Centre of Excellence in Athens, and NCSR Demokritos and EY 
Global Centre of Excellence in Artificial Intelligence.
The following table presents a collection of indicative AI Use Cases that are currently deployed by Greek 
enterprises in different sectors of the economy.
Economic Sector
Indicative AI Use cases
Telecom
Local operators have already employed advanced analytics and AI in different 
applications, like
*	Network analytics for real-time service quality control and customer experience 
improvement.
*	Customer analytics for providing more personalised offers/content to customers 
(related to acquisition, development (x-, up-sell), loyalty, retention) or 
improving customer experience.
*	Chatbots for addressing high volume customers' service requests or information 
inquiries.
*	Operational analytics, to estimate time to complete on pending service requests 
and identify pain areas
Healthcare
In the healthcare domain use of AI is noted in both public and private organizations. 
Examples of these activities are briefly presented below:  
*	Private hospitals use AI and cognitive computing solutions to help doctors more 
effectively treat patients having complex diseases like cancer. The use of such 
solutions automatically presents to doctors the most recent scientific knowledge 
regarding treatment options for their patients together with evidence why each 
treatment option is considered for each patient based on patients' 
characteristics.   
*	During the COVID-19 pandemic several AI initiatives have been performed in 
Greece, like the COVID chatbot for the efficient reply to citizens' COVID-19 
related questions.
Financial Services
Large Financial institutions (retail banks or insurance companies) are using AI 
techniques in order to:
*	Gain commercial insights about their customers and promote relevant offerings 
to the right clients through a set of targeted campaigns,
*	Understand the voice of their customers by analysing customers' comments 
from several sources with the ultimate goal of improving customer service and 
satisfaction,
*	Detect suspicious fraudulent patterns of activity,
*	Predict transaction counts in different time periods proactively solving potential 
issues.
Travel and 
Accommodation
Intelligent dialogue systems (chatbots) have been developed for service providers in 
travel and accommodation. These systems, which also have humanoid form, use AI 
techniques to respond to visitors'/customers' questions, related to flights or airport 
processes and posed in a couple of languages, in a user-friendly way, targeting 
customer satisfaction.
Power and Utilities
AI techniques have been used for activities like the prediction of the daily electricity 
load demand or for monitoring systems and detecting anomalies in their operation. 
Analytics in this area have demonstrated great assistance in the aforementioned 
areas.
Shipping and 
Maritime
Leveraging the strong international position of the Greek shipping sector, Greek 
companies have been developing vertical solutions based on AI and ML, related to: 
For example, such solutions include: 
*	Offer decision support insights that consider weather, geolocation and ship data 
to support better planning of shipping routes, leading to significant cost savings.
*	Predictive maintenance, leveraging on ship sensors data, to mitigate issues 
related to equipment proactively.
*	Provide information on ship and harbour availability.
*	Predict the amount of available tonnage in near term.
Retain and CGC 
(Consumer 
Packaged Goods)
Gradually solutions relating to customer interaction and experience are being used 
in the retail and consumer good industry e.g.:
*	In the retail industry chatbots have been produced for providing product related 
information and their availability.
*	In the tobacco industry systems that collect, and process customer data use 
advanced analytics and ML to target their actions to specific consumer 
characteristics.
Other
In the legal domain, like in the Nomiki Bibliothiki Group, AI helps the company's 
personnel in the classification of legislative acts and in the assignment of metadata 
to these acts.
Table 41: Indicative List of AI Use Cases Already Deployed by Greek Enterprises
While Greek private sector innovation and investment appetite has been hit by the long financial crisis as well 
as the current COVID-19 health and economic crisis, the upcoming period offers a very favourable 
environment for investment in enabling technologies as AI. Both private (e.g., Equifund), public - national and 
EU (Recovery fund, Horizon, ESPA, Public Investment Plan, etc.) as well as mix like the innovative concept of 
Phaistos fund aimed for sectoral 5G enabled solutions (AI including) using a mix of public and private financing.
The successful adoption and development of AI solutions could: 
1.	Accelerate competitiveness of Greek exportable services / products. Based on recent studies (e.g., 5G 
strategy and objectives, EY Study for Ministry of Digital Governance) there are sectors that qualify as most 
attractive to receive the benefits of AI (in terms of GVA, exports, social impact, use of ICT services, int'l 
benchmarks). These sectors are manufacturing (incl. mining and construction), transport and logistics, 
agriculture, power and utilities, ICT, health and tourism (thus the latter not an official economic sector).
2.	Trigger and stimulate investments at various levels, for example: 
o	In terms of int' companies locating in Greece digital and analytics their regional / global solution 
centres benefiting of local pool of highly skilled, English speaking resources and the Greek 
environment and life-style
o	Creating new business models - players in the data value chain (data brokers, AI application 
providers, etc.)
3.	Improve health, safety, and environmental conditions. AI solutions can drastically improve working 
conditions in terms of health and safety, especially in cases of manufacturing, mining, construction, 
transport, and logistics. 
4.	Improve customer/user experience. The use of AI will eventually provide better services and products to 
the end customers; thus, improving their overall quality of living.


In order to formulate a successful AI strategy for the private sector, we consider it important to identify and 
address, where possible, the key related challenges.
 
7.1.3	CHALLENGES FOR ST4
The challenges related to successful adoption and development of AI in the Greek private sector could be 
categorized in Technical, Commercial and Operational, the ones related to Trust. A full list of identified 
challenges appears in Table 42.
The technical challenges relate mainly to two domains which are missing data infrastructure (in terms of actual 
data, missing new data sources as IoT/Sensors, sectoral data models etc.) and low awareness - completeness 
level on AI for the majority of their employees (executives, managers as well as lower ranking technical 
personnel).
In terms of commercial and business challenges the main ones related to three key topics. The access to data 
(own or 3rd party) especially for the SMEs that dominate the Greek market, the low-risk appetite for new 
investments and innovation coupled with low maturity on underlying digital infrastructures (high speed 
connectivity, cloud computing etc.).
Lastly in terms of Trust in AI challenges faced relate to lack of understanding on what "good AI means" and the 
unclear or missing regulatory/legislative framework that discourages use of AI in current use cases and even 
more the development of innovative business models based on AI.
Category/Nature
Challenges
Technical
*	Low volumes (depth and richness of data), even in large organizations, there is a 
large amount of data sources not exploited (collected and managed).
*	Low use of IoT in infrastructure, household, sectors -> no large volumes of IoT 
data.
*	Most organizations are tackling with data management issues rather than AI 
solution development.
*	Missing sectoral / functional common data models / standardization for cross-
organization / sector co-operation.
*	Data and Models that are GR specific: NLP GR solutions missing (e.g., chatbots, 
virtual assistants etc.), GR flora/agricultural production, GR culture. 
*	Shift from pilots to large scale operational use.
*	Low awareness of the fast evolving technologies, tools and practices. Small % of 
senior / mid management as well experienced personnel (technical and business) 
understands  AI or has skills.
*	Brain drain; A plethora of skilled resources with AI related academic background 
have found or still seek employment abroad.
Commercial & 
Operational
*	Fragmented sectors (too many players) result to fragmented data sets, that limit 
the case of using AI.
*	Low R&D investment and risk appetite from large organizations.
*	Current applications of AI are built within organizations leveraging "Own data".
*	AI SMEs not having access to large "sanitized" production data to test/train their 
products.
*	No external monetization use cases for AI; no clear business case, no evident 
business model to provide data - everyone wants to sell their data, not buy.
*	AI seen as a "competitive advantage" rather than an exportable service / 
knowledge.
*	Low penetration of cloud solutions (both in large corporates and SMEs)
*	Unclear data broker model.
*	Lagging in mobile high bandwidth connectivity vs. EU (not so much coverage but 
actual adoption).
*	Lack of in-house knowledge related to AI strategy and governance (AI disrupts 
organizational decisioning frameworks).
Trust Related
*	Education on ethical/robust AI and AI principles ("What good AI looks like"). Both 
from the side of users and producers of AI solutions.
*	Ambiguity on legislation / regulation e.g., how to "justify" AI results in   
autonomous vehicles, risk credit scores, insurance use cases etc.
*	Data protection rules and % of users that provide consent.
Table 42: Challenges for AI Adoption and Use by the Greek Private Sector

7.2	ST4 ACTIONS PLAN
Based on the key challenges identified it is considered crucial that in the near-term period (next 2-3 years) 
public policy action focuses on two key pillars:
*	Establishing the necessary foundations for AI use (infrastructure, regulation, skills, etc.) (SA4.1, SA4.2, 
SA4.5, SA4.8, SA4.9, SA4.10)
*	Bridging the skills gap and creating awareness on AI and its benefits to all direct and indirect 
stakeholders, (SA4.7, SA4.11, SA4.12) 
In parallel, forward -looking actions for private sector regarding unlocking new business models and private 
sector experimentation and innovation based on AI are also proposed with specific focus on priority sectors as 
manufacturing (incl. mining and construction), transport and logistics (included shipping), agriculture, power 
and utilities, health, ICT, and tourism (thus the latter not an official economic sector). (SA4.3, SA4.4, SA4.6)

7.2.1	ACTION 1: SUPPORT INVESTMENTS IN ENABLING INFRASTRUCTURES (CLOUD, 
COMPUTING RESOURCES, IOT, 5G) - FOCUS ON SMES
Given the strategic focus on extending and facilitating access to national AI infrastructures (ST1), the specific 
action targets the maximization of the usage of AI infrastructures (national but also private) by the industry 
and in particular SMEs., 
An important branch for the action is the provision of test-before-invest infrastructures via the opening of 
national infrastructure at no or little cost via the establishment of industrial access programmes and the access 
to DIH assets for small-scale experiments and demonstrators. In operational settings, the mobilization of 
industry chambers and business unions for the bulk provision of equipment and the inclusion of industry-
targeting infrastructure in national contracts is a good initiator for technology penetration in the industry.
State can also support financially private investments in AI infrastructures to facilitate AI operational use 
adoption, focusing ideally on selected sectors and SMEs.
In conjunction with government-dependent activities, an important aspect is the establishment of 
collaboration fora for defining and monitoring an open data marketplace for private data, where different 
companies will contribute parts of their data assets to be used by others in a mutually beneficial environment.
This action will therefore contribute to addressing the following challenges:
*	Increasing "universal" adoption and production use of AI (cross-sector).
*	Fostering development of local AI solutions that create competitive advantage.
The actions can be also broken down to the following suggested sub-actions:
*	Perform AI Strategy sectoral studies to quantify impact of AI and identify priority AI domains - use cases 
that could be eligible for rest of actions. Priority sectors suggested are manufacturing (incl. mining and 
construction), transport and logistics, agriculture, power and utilities, ICT, health and tourism (thus the 
latter not an official economic sector).
*	Support the development of pilot production lines to foster manufacturers' experimentation with 
Industry 4.0 and AI technologies. Such production lines could be developed by large manufacturers and 
industrial associations, in collaboration with research centres and DIHs. This action is closely linked to the 
development of experimental infrastructures and testbeds, which are foreseen in both ST1 and ST3.
*	Develop testbeds for field experimentation of AI systems in the agriculture sector for example, including 
lots equipped with sensors and smart objects like UAVs and geospatial data. These will have improved 
effects on quality improvement, productivity enhancement and resource management such as intelligent 
irrigation, tackling simultaneously environmental challenges. This is also linked to the development of 
experimental infrastructures and testbeds, as planned in ST1 and ST3.
*	Provide coupons/promotional credits for Connectivity, Cloud/Supercomputing resources to SMEs, in 
order to test, pilot of AI applications.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST4.1: Support Investments in Enabling Infrastructures (Cloud, Computing Resources, IoT, 5G) - Focus 
on SMEs
Action Code: ST4.1
Key stakeholders:  Ministry of Digital Governance, Ministry of Development, Industry chambers, 
Governmental agencies
Duration:  24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M12 Sectoral Studies (at least 5 priority sectors)
M12 Strategy for making national infrastructure available to the industry 
M12 Private sector financing program of AI infrastructure
Links to other STs: ST1, ST3 (notably with their Testbeds and Infrastructure development tasks)
Type of action:  Financing, Operational
Indicative KPIs: # of sector strategies, # of companies receiving financing support, € value and % of uptake, 
size of resources financed / in use
Table 43: Information about Action ST4.1 ("Support Investments in Enabling Infrastructures (Cloud, Computing 
Resources, IoT, 5G) - Focus on SMEs")
State can also support financially private investments in AI infrastructures to facilitate AI operational use 
adoption, focusing ideally on selected sectors and SMEs.
In conjunction with government-dependent activities, an important aspect is the establishment of 
collaboration fora for defining and monitoring an open data marketplace for private data, where different 
companies will contribute parts of their data assets to be used by others in a mutually beneficial environment.
This action will therefore contribute to addressing the following challenges:
*	Increasing "universal" adoption and production use of AI (cross-sector).
*	Fostering development of local AI solutions that create competitive advantage.
The actions can be also broken down to the following suggested sub-actions:
*	Perform AI Strategy sectoral studies to quantify impact of AI and identify priority AI domains - use cases 
that could be eligible for rest of actions. Priority sectors suggested are manufacturing (incl. mining and 
construction), transport and logistics, agriculture, power and utilities, ICT, health and tourism (thus the 
latter not an official economic sector).
*	Support the development of pilot production lines to foster manufacturers' experimentation with 
Industry 4.0 and AI technologies. Such production lines could be developed by large manufacturers and 
industrial associations, in collaboration with research centres and DIHs. This action is closely linked to the 
development of experimental infrastructures and testbeds, which are foreseen in both ST1 and ST3.
*	Develop testbeds for field experimentation of AI systems in the agriculture sector for example, including 
lots equipped with sensors and smart objects like UAVs and geospatial data. These will have improved 
effects on quality improvement, productivity enhancement and resource management such as intelligent 
irrigation, tackling simultaneously environmental challenges. This is also linked to the development of 
experimental infrastructures and testbeds, as planned in ST1 and ST3.
*	Provide coupons/promotional credits for Connectivity, Cloud/Supercomputing resources to SMEs, in 
order to test, pilot of AI applications.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST4.1: Support Investments in Enabling Infrastructures (Cloud, Computing Resources, IoT, 5G) - 
Focus on SMEs
Action Code: ST4.1
Key stakeholders:  Ministry of Digital Governance, Ministry of Development, Industry chambers, 
Governmental agencies
Duration:  24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M12 Sectoral Studies (at least 5 priority sectors)
M12 Strategy for making national infrastructure available to the industry 
M12 Private sector financing program of AI infrastructure
Links to other STs: ST1, ST3 (notably with their Testbeds and Infrastructure development tasks)
Type of action:  Financing, Operational
Indicative KPIs: # of sector strategies, # of companies receiving financing support, € value and % of uptake, 
size of resources financed / in use
Table 44: Information about Action ST4.1 ("Support Investments in Enabling Infrastructures (Cloud, Computing 
Resources, IoT, 5G) - Focus on SMEs")

7.2.2	ACTION 2: DEFINE SECTORIAL DATA MODELS & AI METHODOLOGIES 
 This action targets the combination of rules (ontologies) and ML/DL models to create more powerful, 
transparent, explainable and trusted AI systems in order to facilitate the adoption and wider use of AI 
developments by both the private and public sectors. Priority sectors considered: manufacturing (incl. mining 
and construction), transport and logistics, agriculture, power and utilities, ICT, and tourism (thus the latter not 
an official economic sector).
The action addresses the following sub-targets at a per sector basis:
*	To create vocabularies of common terms used per sector and target the universal use of the developed 
sectoral schemata in order to achieve interoperability.
*	To define general rules (ontologies) per sector that will be based on the developed sectoral schemata.
*	To aggregate or create datasets for potential ML/DL data model generation. 
The challenges to be overcome include:
*	Data and model sharing consensus between enterprises that are active in each sector may be difficult.
*	The development of AI models per sector can be time and effort intensive.
To achieve the above mentioned targets the following sub-actions could be developed by the private sector in 
close collaboration, where possible, with the public sector:
*	To develop a catalogue of sectors and the respective data models. The catalogue should also contain 
instructions on how to share and use sectoral data
*	To select and focus on a set of main use cases which are significant for each sector and to which AI/ML 
models can be applied in order to boost economic growth. Create, publish, and disseminate information 
on the most prominent value-added applications of AI in various sectors, along with roadmaps and best 
practices for realizing them.
*	Fund the development of reference, technology showcasing projects in major sectors of the economy. 
Disseminate showcases at sector level in collaboration with relevant associations, innovation clusters, AI 
centres and DIHs. This links to relevant activities of ST3.
*	To encourage mapping of the different enterprise data schemas to sector specific schemas in order to 
achieve interoperability and the re-use of the developed AI models.
*	To adopt data sharing between data providers/creators both at public and private domains. 
*	To foster the collaboration between enterprises to develop schemata/data models and rules (ontologies) 
per sector.  
*	To create common competitions/challenges for academia and enterprises to develop and share AI/ML 
models for the chosen use cases and shared data, possibly through some financial incentives/awards. 
*	More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST4.2: Define Sectorial Data Models & AI methodologies
Action Code: ST4.2
Key stakeholders:  Ministry of Digital Governance, Sector relevant Ministry, Industry Chambers (SEV, SEPE, 
EVEA, SETE, etc.), small, medium and large sized enterprises; Public sector and Research Organizations can 
be also involved. 
Duration: 24 m
Indicative Milestones: 
M6 - Sectoral data model catalogue
M24 - Data models per sector
M12 (linked to ST3) - AI centres and DIHs
Links to other STs: ST3, ST5
Type of action:  Operational, Financing, Informative
Indicative KPIs: # of sectoral data models available, completeness of sectoral data models in terms of 
instructions and AI methodologies, # of companies joined per sector, # of companies providing data per 
sector
Table 45: Information about Action ST4.2 ("Define Sectorial Data Models & AI methodologies")

7.2.3	ACTION 3: FACILITATE PRIVATE (CROSS-)SECTOR DATA SHARING / MONETIZING 
FRAMEWORK INCL. DATA BROKERS
This action is destined to facilitate data sharing across private sector enterprises, including sharing of 
proprietary datasets. In this direction the data hubs that will be established in ST1 as national infrastructures 
for private data sharing will be exploited. The Action will follow the timelines of the respective activities of ST1.

7.2.4	ACTION 4: DEFINE PUBLIC - PRIVATE DATA SHARING FRAMEWORK AND TOOLS
Defining a Public - Private data sharing framework and providing the necessary tools to companies to embark 
on the AI era is of great importance for fostering AI. Greece should establish a Government data strategy that 
sets out action plans to manage data as a strategic asset and deepen the collection and use of data. As a first 
step should be the enrichment of the data.gov.gr, registering all the data sources and available data currently 
at hand and then developing a strategy to enhance the data set. Towards this initiative a public - private data 
sharing framework could be of help.
The action address various challenges including:
*	Data accessibility. Even in large organizations, there is a significant amount of data sources not exploited 
(even though collected and managed).
*	Lack of standardized Data models, as well as missing sectoral data models for cross-organization co-
operation (e.g., across value chains of the economy).
*	Data and Models that are specific to Greek organizations e.g., lack of NLP solutions for chatbots, and 
virtual assistants.
*	Fragmented sectors (i.e., too many players) resulting to fragmented data sets, which hinders data 
exploitation.
The action comprises the following sub-actions:
*	Develop a Public sector data strategy that would enable data collection and management as well as data 
sharing between Government agencies. It should be centred on the public sector putting in place the 
organisational structures, technical systems, and processes and capabilities to manage and use data across 
its lifecycle, from problem statement definition to exploitation.
*	Define the Public - Private data sharing framework & tools. As the nation's custodian of personal and 
administrative data, the Government holds a data resource that many companies find valuable. The 
Government can help drive cross-sectoral data sharing and innovation by curating, cleaning, and providing 
the private sector with access to Government datasets. The envisaged Public-Private Data Sharing 
Framework will facilitate the sharing of Government data with non-Government entities (NGEs) and key 
commercial partners, by defining the scope, type, granularity, and safeguards (people, process, and 
technical) of Government data that can be shared with the private sector. As a start, we will work closely 
with the domain agency leads to develop this Framework to support the implementation of the National 
AI Projects. We will develop a similar framework for NGEs and companies to share data with Government 
agencies.
*	Establish trusted data intermediaries for public - private data exchange. The Government will identify 
organisations to serve as trusted data intermediaries for data fusion and distribution. These trusted 
entities could be situated in either the private or public sector, depending on the sector, type of data, and 
where the majority of data are sited.
*	Define and promulgate common data standards to ensure data interoperability. To facilitate data fusion, 
the Government will work with companies in key sectors to define and promulgate a set of common data 
standards for the sector (e.g., standards for health records across restructured hospitals, private GPs and 
research institutes).
*	Curate and publish a meta-data catalogue of public-private datasets required to implement the National 
AI Projects. We will also work with the trusted data intermediaries to define common data standard and 
technical safeguards to anonymize, secure, and provide companies and researchers with access to these 
data. This will help facilitate data discovery and anchor data and AI collaboration between Government 
agencies, industry, and researchers.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST4.4: Define Public - Private Data Sharing Framework and Tools
Action Code: ST4.4
Key stakeholders:  Ministry of Digital Governance, universities, private sector, sector 
organizations/chambers
Duration:  18 m
Indicative Milestones: 
M6 - Public private sector data sharing framework
M12 - Establishment of trusted intermediaries
M12 - Common data standards
Links to other STs: ST1, ST3, ST5, ST6
Type of action:  Financing, legislative, operational
Indicative KPIs: # of sectors or # of use cases covered by public-private data sharing standards, # of 
intermediaries for public - private data exchange
Table 46: Information about Action ST4.4 ("Define Public - Private Data Sharing Framework and Tools")
7.2.5	ACTION 5: FOSTER SME INNOVATION 
Establishing Innovation hubs with a focus on AI is a key step in increasing adoption of AI throughout the Private 
sector and especially within SMEs. The hubs could be either multi-stakeholder that aims to both the public and 
the private sectors. The later will help both public and private stakeholders to access sector-specific, 
technological, and financial expertise and streamline efforts to increase Greece's AI related research and 
innovation activities.
Such an innovation hub could be a new national platform to support SMEs and Centres to jumpstart their AI 
journey. It should provide access to resources for AI experimentation such as off-the-shelf, pre-built AI 
solutions ('Bricks'), curated datasets from industry and Government, cutting-edge AI libraries and tools, and 
supercomputing resources. AI Makerspace will also aim to grow local companies to be able to deliver these 
solutions to our SMEs over the next 2−3 years.
The action alleviates several challenges of ST4, including:
*	Low R&D investment and risk appetite from large organizations
*	Introvert cultures i.e., the fact that current applications of AI are built within organizations leveraging 
"Own data". AI seen as a "competitive advantage" rather than an exportable service / knowledge.
*	AI SMEs do not have access to large "sanitized" production data to test/train their products
*	No external monetization use cases for AI; no clear business case, no evident business model to provide 
data - everyone wants to sell their data, not buy.
The implementation of the action includes the following sub-actions:
*	The inception and execution of AI Hackathons to solve sectoral problems with the use of AI and other 
emerging technologies. Such Hackathons could be run by the different chambers per sector and 
augmented by the assistance of universities and the other initiatives listed here such as the open data / 
sectoral data models.
*	Sanitized Data sets for SMEs could potentially help SMEs to ignite their journey into AI. A lot of SME 
companies that see differently the sector that they operate within are trying to utilize new and emerging 
technologies such as AI, however they lack the data and in some cases the expertise to do so.
*	Digital Innovation hubs could play an important role in this Strategic Action. Institutional infrastructure 
will be required to drive AI adoption, and these organisations will be mandated to provide support to the 
intended end users. As part of ST3, Greece should plan to establish DIHs with a focus on AI. These hubs 
should act as multi-stakeholder innovation centres that will help both the public and private sector to 
grasp new digital opportunities. The DIH will allow both public and private stakeholders to access sector-
specific, technological and financial expertise, and streamline efforts to increase Greece's AI-related 
research and innovation activities. The DIH will also provide assistance in setting out how the application 
of AI can be used to solve real-life problems through applied research, demonstration spaces and advisory 
services.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST4.5: Foster SME Innovation
Action Code: ST4.5
Key stakeholders:  SMEs, Innovation Clusters, Digital Innovation Hubs
Duration: 24-36 m
Indicative Milestones: 
M6 - Inception of AI Hackathons
M6 - Sanitized data sets for SMEs
M12 - Digital innovation hubs
Links to other STs: ST1, ST3, ST5, ST6
Type of action:  Financing, legislative, operational
Indicative KPIs: # of DIH, # of sanitisated data sets, # of SMEs participating in action, # of use cases, # of 
Innovation Hubs established
Table 47: Information about Action ST4.5 ("Foster SME Innovation")

7.2.6	ACTION 6: FINANCE AND INCENTIVIZE R&D FOR AI
Companies are looking for an ally for a successful growth strategy leveraging AI, looking for ways to improve 
their productivity, increase their flexibility and boost customer satisfaction rates through automation. Also, 
faster access of new products and services to the market is another key reason for implementing AI. There are, 
however, a number of factors that discourage businesses from turning to artificial intelligence solutions. The 
high cost of obtaining the relevant solutions and the lack of specialized personnel to evaluate them are the 
main factors that hinder the development and application of AI technology in organizations and companies. 
For this reason, the Greek government must provide incentives for leveraging artificial intelligence in the 
private sector but also to claim relevant funding from European programs for innovative businesses and 
Centres.
This action aims to contribute to:
*	Reducing the cost of obtaining the AI solutions (i.e., the Total Cost of Ownership of AI solutions for Public 
Sector enterprises).
*	Address the lack of specialized and skilful personnel for deploying and operating AI solutions.
*	Access to sustainable funding for innovative AI solutions.
Furthermore, the action suggests to: 
*	Reform tax policy to promote and encourage innovation.
*	Improve access to funding.
*	Encourage University-Industry interaction
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST4.6: Finance and Incentivize R&D for AI
Action Code: ST4.6
Key stakeholders:  Ministry of Development, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Digital Governance
Duration: 36m
Indicative Milestones:
M12 - Prepare and Consult on Tax Policy Reforms
M12 - Improve access to funding, via Elevate Greece
Links to other STs: ST2, ST3
Type of action:  Legislative, Operational, Financing
Indicative KPIs: -# of R&D projects qualified, # of private sector participants, # of companies funded for AI 
related work
Table 48: Information about Action ST4.6 ("Finance and Incentivize R&D for AI")

7.2.7	ACTION 7: DEVELOP AI TALENT IN PRIVATE SECTOR 
 This action targets the development of digital skills in AI through training activities that start at school, 
continue during university education, and are continuously extended during each person's life. It addresses the 
need for creating soft and technical skills to students, employees, employers, leaders, people with special 
needs. The action includes the following sub-actions:
The action's objectives can be achieved via a coordinated implementation of the following sub-actions in 
strong synergies with ST2 as outlined below:
*	By strengthening AI courses in university programmes, increasing the number of students at existing 
postgraduate programmes, and financing new ones with emphasis on multidisciplinary subjects, as 
detailed in ST2.2.1.
*	By fostering collaborations between universities and technological enterprises, e.g., by reinforcing 
internship programmes as an integral part of graduate and postgraduate studies and making sure that 
academic and educational curricula take into account the labour market needs. These actions are detailed 
in ST2.2.2.
*	By designing and implementing reskilling/upskilling programmes for employees, taking into account 
categories of professionals (for example, professionals in the computer science domain, but also 
employees in other disciplines who want to use some AI technology in their work, like doctors) and 
providing lifelong learning opportunities. These actions are described in ST2.3.3.
The action will be implemented in strong synergies with ST2.3.3, which is focused on developing training 
infrastructures for the upskilling and reskilling of public sector employees.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST4.7: Develop AI Talent in Private Sector
Action Code: ST4.7
Key stakeholders:  Industry Chambers (SEV, SEPE), Enterprises, Research Organizations and the Public 
Sector 
Duration: 24 m
Indicative Milestones:
M12 - Integrate AI courses in University programmes
M6 - Implement the necessary regulatory framework for Universities - Enterprises cooperation
M12 - Targeted courses and PhD programs for AI
Links to other STs: Strong Synergies with the Training Activities of ST2 for the Private Sector
Type of action:  Operational, Informative
Indicative KPIs: % of Workforce Reskilled/Upskilled in AI Systems & Technologies, # of citizens accessing and 
finishing AI related educative material / training
Table 49: Information about Action ST4.7 ("Develop AI Talent in Private Sector")

7.2.8	ACTION 8: PRIVACY PRESERVING DATA ANALYSIS 
There are existing pools of information and data created on a day-to-day basis for various business reasons, 
but which remain within the respective institutions. Sharing and exchanging data is essential to the operation 
of any data processing and algorithmic decision-making mechanism using AI. Data containing sensitive 
personal data of users need special treatment since their management is subject to regulations such as the 
European Personal Data Regulation (GDPR) giving rise to legal and ethical implications. At the same time, the 
development of AI algorithms is facing more and more challenges with the emergence of adversarial methods 
for reconstruction and de-anonymization of anonymized data. A mechanism of data sharing and collective 
development of AI models and facilitated by the respective professional Chambers will accelerate the 
development and adoption of new AI technologies. The action contributes to:
*	Engaging and incentivising the respective private sector stakeholders.
*	Leveraging privacy preserving decentralized data processing methodologies.
*	Managing the sharing of sensitive personal data in a regulatory compliant way.
The implementation of the action will include: (i) The development of infrastructures for encrypted and 
aggregated analysis of personal data; (ii) The dissemination of advantages and opportunities of the 
decentralized privacy preserving approaches to AI-based data analytics; and (iii) A reinforced collaboration of 
private companies and academic institutions. This action can benefit from a sandbox for trustworthy and 
democratic AI (see Action ST6.6), as well as an ethical and democratic AI toolkit (see Action ST6.7).
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST4.8: Privacy Preserving Data Analysis
Action Code: ST4.8
Key stakeholders:  Greek government, Companies and industry Chambers, Academic institutions
Duration: 24m
Indicative Milestones:
M24 - Implementation of privacy preserving framework
Links to other STs: ST1, ST6
Type of action:  Legislative, Operational
Indicative KPIs: # Enterprises Using of the Framework
Table 50: Information about Action ST4.8 ("Privacy Preserving Data Analysis")

7.2.9	ACTION 9: REGULATORY/LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK FOR DECISION MAKING BASED ON 
AI
In AI systems, it is necessary to establish a complete governance implementation, controls and measures for 
monitoring of both data and models. The creation of quality assurance frameworks in every department of the 
company or organization participating in the development of an AI system enables transparency, 
accountability and guidelines to narrow down and resolve issues in case of misfunction. A clear 
Regulatory/Legislative framework will facilitate norms across industries based on existing international 
practices and reduce risk in developing and adopting novel AI solutions. In conjunction with explainable AI 
activities to be undertaken in ST6, the action will facilitate private enterprises in:
*	The Explainability and assessment of the behavior of AI models.
*	Addressing ethical and discrimination challenges, while identifying and mitigating biased AI behaviours.
*	Defining roles and responsibilities of the respective AI technology stakeholders.
Overall, the action will customize the framework of ST6 for use from the private sector through:
*	Establishing clear rules and areas of responsibility of private legal entities.
*	Defining laws and regulations consistent with existing National and European regulations.
*	Training of engineers and researchers on ethical and social challenges.
*	Describing in what way an AI model is auditable.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST4.9: Regulatory/Legislative framework for decision making based on AI
Action Code: ST4.9
Key stakeholders:  Ministry of Digital Governance, Industry Chambers and Company's AI governance 
committees, EU Partners
Duration: 24m
Indicative Milestones:
M4 - Definition of the problem (ST6)
M18 - Establishment of the Regulatory / Legislative framework
Links to other STs: Strong links and Synergies with ST6
Type of action:  Financing, Legislative, Informative
Indicative KPIs: # of Enterprises using the Framework; # of Use Cases Implemented based on the 
Framework
Table 51: Information about Action ST4.9 ("Regulatory/Legislative framework for decision making based on 
AI")

7.2.10	ACTION 10: ATTRACTING FOREIGN PRIVATE INVESTMENTS ON AI 
Provide incentives for international companies to set up or transfer AI related activities in Greece. This will 
increase demand of AI skilled talent in Greece, allow knowledge transfer and have indirect impact on the 
overall digital ecosystem. The recent collaboration of NCSR Demokritos and EY Global for the AI Centre of 
Excellence provides a good example of how local talent can attract int'l investments. The attraction of relevant 
investments should be pursued through:
*	Providing financial and tax policy incentives for transferring / setting up their operations in Greece. 
*	Provide compelling infrastructure (connectivity, computing) and real estate set up.
*	Promote Greek pool of talent in international employers.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST4.10: Attracting Foreign Private Investments on AI
Action Code: ST4.10
Key stakeholders:  Ministry of Development, Ministry of Digital Governance, Academia, Industry and Int' 
Chambers
Duration: 24 m
Indicative Milestones: 
M12 Preparation and consultation on the relevant policy developments
M12 Execution of first marketing and branding campaign regarding Greek talent and other compelling value 
propositions for investors
Links to other STs: ST3 on the Innovation Ecosystem Building Activities; ST2 in terms of human capital 
development activities.
Type of action:  Informative, Operational
Indicative KPIs: € value of AI Investments Attracted; Number of AI Investments Attracted, # of FTEs 
employed
Table 52: Information about Action ST4.10 ("Attracting Foreign Private Investments on AI")

7.2.11	ACTION 11: BUILD AI AWARENESS FOR PRIVATE ENTERPRISES COMPANIES AND THEIR 
EMPLOYEES 
In conjunction with actions for supporting the development and publishing of AI technologies, this action aims 
to maximize the penetration of AI-based solutions in the products and operations of stakeholders in key 
industrial sectors. To achieve this, the action needs to cover all different stages of an awareness building 
strategy. Suggested implementation steps include: 
*	Providing a framework for monitoring and analysing AI awareness: This will design and develop an online 
cataloguing and reporting platform for expressing company status and needs with respect to the usage of 
AI. Combined with initiatives for informing and interviewing key industry players, the platform will identify 
the main obstacles, challenges, and concerns of the industry regarding the incorporation of AI in their 
business and operations, assess and share best practices and developments, provide informative material 
and the means to connect interested parties with AI experts, etc.
*	Awareness building activities: This item refers to the establishment of an operational framework for 
organizing a series of workshops, seminars and info-days sponsored and supported by governmental 
representatives (ministries) in collaboration with academic and research institutions. Thematic orientation 
should cover all aspects of understanding and using AI in different settings, addressing the needs and 
capacities of the industry as monitored via the tools described above. Actions ST2.3.1, ST2.3.2 and ST2.3.3 
provide concrete examples of training activities towards this direction.
*	Expert-Industry Networking: This will aim to coordinate the bidirectional communication and 
collaboration of AI experts and industry representatives at the informative and operational levels. It 
should foresee the organization of information offices towards such activities and a match-making process 
for information exchange at different levels. On the latter, close collaboration with DIHs for organizing and 
executing demos and tutorials with sectoral focus is a solution that can be timely implemented and 
leverage the utility of DIHs for the industry while also aligning their operations with local demands.
*	Offer broad education and training to the general public, employees, and small-medium enterprises, in 
order to enhance awareness in AI. This can be implemented in conjunction with ST2 activities.
*	Offer specialized training to the general public, employees, and small-medium enterprises, to inform 
them about the objectives, assumptions, and ethical matters related to their AI applications, as well as 
educate them on the individuals' rights regarding their digital footprint and use of their data, with an aim 
to enhance trust in AI. This will be also carried out in conjunction with the ST2 activities and in 
collaboration with the National Academy on AI.
This action relates also to Action ST6.3 on general AI awareness.
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST4.11: Build AI Awareness for Private Enterprises Companies and their Employees
Action Code: ST4.11
Key stakeholders:  Ministry of Digital Governance, Regulatory Agencies, Academia, Industry Chambers, 
Unions, General Public, Academia
Duration: 36 months
Indicative Milestones:
Constantly updating - Framework for monitoring and analyzing AI awareness
M12 - Awareness building activities
Ongoing - Expert industry networking
Ongoing - Specialized training offering
Links to other STs: ST2, ST3
Type of action:  Informative, operational
Indicative KPIs: # of awareness actions, # of companies covered / sector, # of employees educated/trained 
per sector, % awareness level change before - during and after the action 
Table 53: Information about Action ST4.11 ("Build AI Awareness for Private Enterprises Companies and their 
Employees")

7.2.12	ACTION 12: DEFINE AND MONITOR PRIVATE SECTOR AI ADOPTION
Include in the National AI observatory modules and processes for measuring adoption and impact of AI in the 
private sector. In this context, the action will:
*	Establish a private sector registry of private enterprises developing AI applications, in order to facilitate 
the monitoring of the AI adoption. 
*	Establish a private sector registry of AI applications in development or in productive use, in order to 
facilitate the monitoring of the AI adoption. At minimum the ones receiving state support.
*	Perform periodic benchmark studies for AI update
More information about the planning of the action is provided in the following table.
Action ST4.12: Define and Monitor Private Sector AI Adoption
Action Code: ST4.12
Key stakeholders:  Ministry of Digital Governance, Sector/Industry Chambers - organizations
Duration: Continuous (throughout the entire lifecycle of the AI Strategy Implementation)
Indicative Milestones:
M3 AI benchmark study
M6 Processes and Registry Setup
Links to other STs: ST5, ST3
Type of action:  Operational, Informative
Indicative KPIs: # of AI applications currently in research, development & deployment
Table 54: Information about Action ST4.12 ("Define and Monitor Private Sector AI Adoption")



 
8.	STRATEGIC TARGET 5 (ST5): AI FOR PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION

8.1	BACKGROUND, OBJECTIVES AND OPPORTUNITIES
8.1.1	INTRODUCTION
In recent years, Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies have been widely used in a number of areas of Public 
Administration, such as finance, health, agriculture, education and transport. Their applications include fraud 
assessment, disease diagnosis and tracing of disease spread, personalized learning and training, and 
autonomous vehicles. The use of AI technologies and systems, including Machine Learning (ML) and Deep 
Learning (DL), can improve the quality of public services and strengthen the competitiveness of the public 
sector.
Public administration will be a main component of the transition from the Industry 4.0 model to the Society 
5.0 model, in which people's well-being constitutes the main societal target. According to this model, data are 
collected by sensors and devices, are accumulated as Big Data, are analysed through AI and ML/DL, and are 
then implemented, within services to the public, by machines and robots; the latter include Virtual and 
Augmented Reality devices and materialization through 3-D printing.
In Greece, the Ministry of Digital Governance has been recently implementing a rich portfolio of ambitious 
digital transformation projects, which are at the heart of the country's administrative reform. AI should 
become a catalyst for accelerating the implementation of some of these projects and for improving the quality 
of their outcomes. The on-going and accelerated digital transformation of Greece is producing several pillars of 
the AI ecosystem such as large databases, cloud infrastructures, data centres, and legislative initiatives that 
foster digitalization. 
AI can be streamlined with the wider digital strategy of the country, leading to best use of available resources, 
while taking advantage of the country's significant digital transformation momentum. 
At European level, the EU strategy on AI was adopted in 2018, whilst in December 2018 the European 
Commission presented a Coordinated Plan, prepared together with the Member States, to foster the 
development and use of in Europe, scheduled to run until 2027.  On 19/2/2020, the Commission issued a 
White Paper 'on Artificial Intelligence - A European approach to excellence and trust' aiming to set out policy 
options towards the twin objective of promoting the uptake of AI and of addressing associated risks. In 
particular, Action 6 of the White Paper concerns promoting the adoption of AI by the Public Sector, giving 
priority to healthcare, rural administrations and public service operators, and supporting public procurement 
of AI systems.  
Furthermore, in the recent Berlin Declaration on Digital Society and Value-Based Digital Government (at the 
ministerial meeting of 08/12/2020) the adopted principles include:
*	Social participation and digital inclusion: 'Governments and public authorities should lead by example 
and provide digital services, which respond to and evolve with citizens' digital preferences; paying tribute 
to the paradigm shift from "eGov" (electronic Government) to "mGov" (mobile Government), while 
encouraging inclusion or aiming to provide seamless, transparent, accessible and user-friendly digital 
government services. The public sector should encourage wider participation in policy-making by involving 
society in the design of public services through co-creation, experimentation and collaboration'.
*	Empowerment and digital literacy: 'Citizens and businesses should have seamless and easily accessible 
interaction with public administration', should be offered 'fair, transparent and user-friendly digital 
services', 'lifelong learning and development of digital skills', while 'keeping control over their data and its 
use'.
*	Trust and security in digital government interactions: 'Citizens and businesses should be able to rely on 
trustworthy and verifiable digital government services, in full conformity with high security standards and 
responding to user needs', empowered with 'regulatory frameworks that ensure transparency, 
predictability, security-by-design and, possibly, reinforcement or adjustment of existing provisions.
*	Digital sovereignty and interoperability: 'Common standards, modular architectures and the use of Open-
Source Software in the public sector are facilitators for deploying and developing strategic digital tools and 
capacities', whilst 'software, data and tools generated by the public sector should be reusable and openly 
accessible as long as this is compliant with fundamental rights', targeting 'creation of a single market for 
data that will ensure Europe's global competitiveness and data sovereignty'.
*	Human-centred systems and innovative technologies in the public sector: The aim is to promote a 
human-centred, responsible and common-good oriented development and use of AI and other novel 
technologies in the public sector', 'ensuring that such applications are inclusive, help solve societal 
challenges and do not reproduce harmful social or economic biases', while 'being underpinned by a 
regulatory framework that is sufficiently flexible to mitigate the risks while accelerating innovation and 
competitiveness'.
Furthermore, the adopted policy action areas, in EU Member States by 2024, include 'Creation of value-based, 
human-centred AI systems for use in the public sector', which:
*	'fosters responsible, accountable public welfare and human-centred development, and uses transparent, 
explainable AI, promoting competitiveness and innovation in EU.
*	ensures that necessary safeguards are in place to prevent, detect and remedy unlawful discrimination 
through the use of AI systems in the public sector.
*	provides effective ICT security tools and requirements to prevent unauthorised access and use, 
manipulation of data or malicious interference with self-learning algorithms.
*	ensures confidentiality, integrity and availability of AI systems over the entire life cycle.
*	recognizes the importance of explainable AI, including e.g., adequate transparency at algorithm level, in 
order to strengthen trustworthiness.
*	ensures proper data governance mechanisms - including appropriate levels of human oversight, if needed, 
ensuring AI systems' correct functionality and decision-making'.
The above principles and the policy action on developing European AI systems for use in the public sector 
provide the framework for the Greek National Strategy for AI, as far its use in the public sector is concerned.

8.1.2	AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
AI can help the Public Sector provide efficient and personalized services to citizens and businesses, producing a 
positive impact on public policies and services. 
'Defining the National Strategy for introduction of AI technologies in Public Administration' is the aim of this 
section. 
Achieving this aim will require both the provision, in a coordinated manner, of the necessary data, 
technologies, systems, regulatory frameworks, as well as the development of appropriate skills and expertise, 
within the Administration.
The following, therefore, constitute the main Objectives of the Strategy:
1.	Integration of AI in the services provided by Public Administration, while the latter are designed and 
implemented within the country's National Digital Transformation Reform.
2.	Development of personalized, user-friendly, transparent AI enabled services, encouraging people's 
participation through co-creation, experimentation and collaboration.
3.	Monitoring and Promotion of new AI Technologies in the Public Sector.
4.	Development of Public Data Repositories, as a basic condition for the development and use of AI/ML 
technologies in the public sector.
5.	Promoting and implementing the sharing of data and AI data models among Organizations of the public 
sector and the wider Community, ensuring re-usability and ability to validate AI models and creating a 
marketplace for data and models.
6.	Generation of regulatory and data governance frameworks that ensure robustness, transparency, 
explainability, fairness and updating/adaptation of AI systems, while offering confidentiality, data 
protection and security.
7.	Creation of Digital Skills in the Public Sector in relation to AI.
8.	Education and building of trust among citizens for using and interacting with AI-enabled public services.
9.	Increase of public and private expenditures in AI.
The first three Objectives refer to technical developments needed for the effective and trusted introduction of 
AI technologies in the services and interactions with people that are offered by the Public Administration. The 
following two Objectives refer to the required creation of open public datasets, as well as the sharing of 
successful AI models among different services provided by the public sector. The sixth Objective sets the need 
for a regulatory framework to ensure the adoption and safe usage of AI. The following two Objectives refer to 
the skills, education and trust that are needed to create so as to make feasible AI adoption by the public. The 
last Objective refers to the need for financial investment in AI developments in the public sector, whilst 
encouraging and facilitating investments from the private sector; this is shared by all Strategic Targets; it us, 
therefore, handled at the whole AI Strategy level. 

8.1.3	OPPORTUNITIES
For over a decade Greece has been facing long term recession, endless austerity measures and high 
unemployment rates. In recent years the country experienced staggering growth, which has been interrupted 
because of the recent COVID19 healthcare crises. Therefore, achieving high growth rates in the years to come 
is vital for the Greek economy, the Public Administration and the society.
The Ministry of Digital Governance is leading the country's digital transformation, implementing various 
projects and services offered through the Gov.gr on-line platform. These projects, empowered with the strong 
and tangible political commitment to digital transformation projects, provide the baseline for developing and 
introducing AI enabled features in the services provided to the public.  AI can boost efficiency, prediction, 
monitoring and solution of faults and problems in the everyday operations and service provision of the public 
sector, particularly in fields such as healthcare, finance, transportations, education and security. 
Recently, the Code of "Digital Governance" (law 4727/2020) has been issued by the Greek Parliament. This 
provides the institutional and legal basis for the digital transformation of Greece based on a 10-year ahead 
outlook, whilst it regulates crucial issues in ways that boost the development of AI-related infrastructures, 
such as open data and cloud-first policies. Together with the Bible for Greece Digital Transformation, they 
provide the framework through which AI transformation of the Public Administration can be achieved.
Moreover, many opportunities arise from the recently signed Berlin Declaration on Digital Society and Value-
Based Digital Government. In particular, the Member States have agreed to:
*	'share best practices on the development of successful human-centric AI systems in the public sector,
*	foster transparency and accountability, i.e., by revealing when automated decision-making processes are 
used in digital public services, and ensure quality standards of data sets fed into AI systems when 
designing digital public services, e.g., by quality seals for data sets,
*	stimulate knowledge sharing between practitioners of administrative innovation strategies and examples 
of human centric technologies in public administrations.'
They have also agreed to call upon the European Commission and other EU institutions to:
*	'continue to monitor the uptake of AI within European public administrations.
*	strengthen digital innovation hubs and AI on demand platform.
*	propose a risk-based, future proof and proportionate legislative proposal on AI and an updated AI 
coordinated plan, including measures to promote the uptake of trustworthy and human centric AI by 
public administrations, as appropriate, and assess skills development in public administrations.
*	support research, development and innovation for increasing performance, trustworthiness and uptake of 
AI-based solutions in the public sector'.
The above indicate the strong political support across Europe and all Member States for supporting the AI-
enabled transformation of Public Administration, also underlining that the funds provided for digital 
transformation by the Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF) and by the extraordinary recovery effort "Next 
Generation EU (NGEU)" may have the potential to support, inter alia, the achievement of these common goals 
and the implementation of these actions. At a National level, it can be mentioned that exploitation of the EU 
Recovery fund can also be used towards boosting AI research and product development.

8.2	ST5 ACTIONS PLAN
The transition of the Public Sector to the age of AI, characterized by the above Objectives and the related 
Opportunities, requires generating Action Plans (AP1-AP7) for achieving the following:
*	New types of cross-sectoral management and operation models, in which data and digital resources will 
generally ignore traditional boundaries between public bodies; the Ministry of Digital Governance should 
lead the generation of these models in Public Administration, as far as development and use of open data 
and AI data models is concerned. This is related to Objective 5.
*	Merging, or unifying, various databases of the Public Administration, creating a unique regulated big data 
market (useful for training AI/ML systems) and a central exchange platform for data, models and systems. 
This is related to Objective 4.
*	ML systems that are trained in such open public datasets, and AI systems that are based on rules and on 
interoperable structures and knowledge inserted, or aggregated, in the gov.gr space.  This is related to 
Objectives 2 and 3.
*	Quick wins and success stories that will increase the citizens' and the public administration's trust on AI. 
This is related to Objective 1.
*	Building trust with individuals or communities who will be affected by AI systems that assist with decision 
making. This is related to Objective 8.
*	Critical commitments regarding algorithm impartiality and the protection of fundamental rights, such as 
privacy rights, by all parties involved, including project contractors, data providers and system operators; 
paying specific regard to safety and responsibility related to AI-based products and services. This is related 
to Objective 6.
*	Proper understanding of AI, its capabilities and risks, so that policy makers and civil servants can properly 
assess its integration into public policy areas. This is related to Objective 7.
Moreover, the public sector model in the AI era should be dynamic, in the sense that it should be continuously 
informed about the following AI developments (D1-D3):
1.	Next Generation AI: emerging and new approaches, architectures and paradigms, offering improved 
technical performance, such as robustness, explainability, adaptability, versatility; consequently, applying 
new developments for improving the provided services to the public.
2.	Trustworthy AI: providing new solutions with human agency and oversight, technical robustness and 
safety, privacy and data governance, transparency, diversity, non-discrimination and fairness, societal and 
environmental well-being and accountability; consequently, using systems consistent with the Ethical 
Guidelines of the European AI High-Level Expert-Group.
3.	Safe, Secure AI, and Privacy-preserving AI:  system architectures and oversight mechanisms that ensure 
AI systems are safe and secure by design, robust against attacks and intrusion, and robust against 
manipulation and privacy breaches. This includes security against privilege escalation and audit trails of 
how the system has been used by authorized users.
To achieve the generation of a public sector model, with all the above characteristics, the following Actions, 
which the state should take towards the AI strategy implementation, are required.
 
8.2.1	ACTION 1: AI PUBLIC SECTOR GOVERNANCE
AI Public Sector governance should be able to monitor the progress of Action Plans AP1-AP7 described above 
and inform the Ministry of Digital Governance on any required changes or new directions to be adopted, 
especially related to new developments D1-D3. Specific sub-actions that should be implemented are the 
following:
*	Observatory Generation: An Observatory should be generated that will assist the Ministry of Digital 
Governance to follow the continuously advancing AI field, to design appropriate changes and develop 
future plans and directions. This will also monitor KPIs (Key Performance Indicators) about the progress, 
the success, and the operations of AI projects. Such KPIs will include accomplishments, links to data, 
computing infrastructures, AI experts, AI projects, GDP (Gross Domestic Product) growth, AI-related 
investments. In terms of timing the observatory will be available 12 months following the commencement 
of the action (M12).
*	AI Auditing Body Generation: An AI Auditing Body should be generated that will monitor the development 
of AI systems for the public sector, will provide the requirements and audit the trustworthiness of 
proposed, or developed AI systems, as well as their compliance with the relevant ethical, legal, and 
democratic principles; the formation and the role of the AI Auditing Body is detailed in Action 2 of 
Strategic Target 6.
*	AI Platform and Marketplace: A platform will be generated, which will contribute horizontally to all 
projects and applications of AI and ML/DL, ensuring availability and use of reliable components, such as 
training datasets and algorithm libraries, and evaluation based on reliable evaluation test datasets. The 
platform will be linked to computing infrastructures at affordable terms, ensuring the aggregation of 
appropriate data from each sector, as well as the development and sharing of algorithms in the public 
sector. It will lead to the generation of a marketplace for data and AI model sharing. In terms of timing the 
platform will be available 12 months following the commencement of the action (M12), while the 
marketplace will be available 24 months after the start of the action (M12).
*	Fertile Community Generation: A fertile community will be created, consisting of specialized engineers 
and specialists in each application domain coming from both the state sector and private enterprises, with 
mutually beneficial collaborations around the triangle "Research community, Public and Business". It will 
result in creating a framework of accountability and responsibility between the actors that will develop 
AI/ML systems and applications, so that they operate for the benefit of environmental and social well-
being. In terms of timing the community will be setup at M12 and will become fully functional at M24.

Action ST5.1: AI Public Sector Governance
Action Code: ST5.1
Key stakeholders: Government
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M6: Set-up of AI Observatory and Auditing Body; set-up of an AI Platform 
M12: AI Observatory; AI Auditing Body; AI Platform for the Public Sector; Set-up of Fertile Community
M24: AI Market Place & Fully functional Fertile Community 
Links to other STs: ST6
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural
Indicative KPIs: Number of available resources in AI platform and in Market Place (data models; datasets) 
and number of participants in the Fertile Community 
Table 55: Information about ST5.1 (AI Public Sector Governance)

8.2.2	ACTION 2: AI REFERENCE PROJECTS AND SUCCESS STORIES
A main target is the introduction of AI in government provided services, especially related to gov.gr, so as to 
facilitate citizens' interactions with the public sector. In particular, AI can assist citizens addressing queries to 
the appropriate service within gov.gr, completing forms, finding documents, scheduling appointments. AI can 
assist in understanding and appropriately answering citizen's inquiries and feedback.
In this direction mechanisms should be established for identifying and implementing reference projects. The 
latter will serve as showcases of AI in the public sector and will provide insights and experience for wider 
deployment and use. Likewise, they will serve as success stories that can foster adoption of AI-enabled services 
by citizens and public sector employees (see also Actions ST6.3 and ST6.4). These will lead to the 
implementation of Action Plan AP4, as well as AP2, AP3.
Such reference projects for the public administration are:
8.2.2.1	ANOMALY DETECTION IN PUBLIC OPERATIONAL ENVIRONMENTS
This includes:
*	Development of AI applications against tax evasion, for faster and more effective tax collection, for tax 
surveillance and compliance applications.
*	Development of AI/ML applications for detecting incidents of fuel and petroleum smuggling.
*	The development of systems for the automated identification of illegal acts (e.g., illegal construction) on 
seashore or forest land.
*	Development of AI systems that detect cybercrime and adversarial threats, following progress in self-
learning and behaviour modelling.
*	Development of AI systems assisting the country's defence against threats, physical and cyber dangers.
 The suggested implementation timeline is between 24 and 36 months (i.e., M24-M36).
8.2.2.2	GENERATING THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
This includes:
*	Automatic codification of the Legislation: automate, or facilitate the collection and codification of 
legislation, so that every citizen can know the provisions in force in relation to a legal framework. For this 
purpose, AI and Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques can be used to automate the detection of 
references, references and amendments to a piece of legislation and to facilitate or automate its coding.
*	The development of a system for the automated, real-time recording and transcription of court records.
*	The development of bots for fast and automated legal analysis for specific cases, towards speeding up the 
administration of justice.
*	Addressing the challenges created by AI in national legislation, ensuring a common approach at EU level, 
so that a unified access to the EU single market is possible.
Linkages exist with the Strategic Target 6 and the suggested implementation timeline is 24 months (i.e., M24).

8.2.2.3	GENERATING THE OPEN DATA SHARING FRAMEWORK
Critical to the success of reference projects are horizontal capabilities that can be leveraged in the particular 
projects, particularly related to the generation of open datasets that can be shared and used for development 
of ML/DL and AI systems:
*	Open datasets covering a wide range of applications, including annotated datasets suitable for ML training 
purposes.
*	Generation of public healthcare data repositories, including genomics data and the development of 
systems for assisting early stage, safe and trusted prediction of diseases.
*	DL models pretrained on Greek corpora, available for use on public infrastructures.
 The suggested implementation timeline is 24 months (i.e., M24).

8.2.2.4	DEVELOPMENT OF REFERENCE AI PROJECTS
Specific projects to start with can be the following:
*	Employment of AI to enhance the information search capabilities of the Diavgeia platform, from the 
already existing data; enhancing the Diavgeia platform with metadata so that it will facilitate leveraging 
the Diavgeia material from now on.
*	Employment of AI/NLP techniques to enhance the user experience in the gov.gr portal (e.g., identifying 
navigation paths, re-organizing information on access patterns, providing suggestions for searches and 
actions).
*	Introduction of chatbots in the front office of the public administration towards improving customer 
service and saving human resources that could be reallocated to other tasks.
*	Leveraging, in a privacy-preserving manner, the solemn declarations and powers of attorney to identify 
processes that could be improved, automated, or eliminated in the public sector.
*	Reference projects for the Ministry of Labour (e.g., AI Extensions to the BI programs of Rebrain Greece) 
and the Ministry of Justice (e.g., NLP projects for the automated transcription of court records).
The suggested implementation timeline is between 12 and 18 months (i.e., M12-M18).
Action ST5.2: AI Reference Projects and Success Stories
Action Code: ST5.2
Key stakeholders: Government
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M12:  Development of Pilot AI projects (intelligent Gov.gr search and interaction capabilities; using chatbots 
in public administration); generation of a focused open (public) dataset and data model sharing (such as in 
healthcare and transport domains); first version of the regulatory framework; Development of a pilot 
anomaly detection system (e.g., for financial monitoring of taxation or fuel domain)
M18: Development of reference AI projects across public administration
M24: Generation of open datasets and data models; of the regulatory framework
M36:  Development of anomaly detection systems across public administration
Links to other STs: ST6 (regulatory framework), ST2 (sharing open public datasets)
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural
Indicative KPIs: Number of available pilot and of reference projects; number of open public datasets; 
number of anomaly detection systems 
Table 56: Information about ST5.2 ("AI Reference Projects and Success Stories")

8.2.3	ACTION 3: REFORMING THE PUBLIC SECTOR WITH AI 
As already mentioned, new types of cross-sectoral management and operation models will be generated, in 
which data and digital resources will generally ignore traditional boundaries between public bodies, as 
described in AP1. Specific sub-actions are the following:
8.2.3.1	INFRASTRUCTURES IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR 
In conjunction with the activities for establishing the national AI infrastructures, described in Strategic Target 
1, the prerequisite infrastructures for AI deployment in the public sector should be generated. These will 
include open datasets and databases for training and testing algorithms, and computing infrastructures for 
deploying and operating computationally intensive AI applications (e.g., DL, Reinforcement Learning, RL, 
algorithms). In this framework, access to data and computing resources for AI-based innovation in the public 
sector should be enabled through the G-Cloud, H-Cloud and RE-Cloud infrastructures; large scale governmental 
databases should be hosted and managed in these infrastructures. 
The suggested implementation timeline is 24 months (i.e., M24).

8.2.3.2	ATTRACTING AI TALENT IN THE SCOPE OF INNOVATIVE PROJECTS
Given the rapid evolution of AI technologies it is important to ensure that AI knowledge and innovation are 
regularly injected within public sector organizations. To this end, mechanisms for transferring AI knowledge 
and talent from the research, academic and private to the public sector should be established. This can be 
achieved by organizing competitive programs for innovation development in the public sector, such as 
hackathons or innovation contests.
The suggested implementation timeline is 24 months (i.e., M24).
8.2.3.3	EMPOWERING IT TEAMS OF THE PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION TO IMPLEMENT AI PROJECTS
The implementation of ambitious AI-related public administration projects requires strong IT teams within 
public sector organizations. Greece should ensure that AI-competent professionals' team up for the 
implementation of AI projects, within the workforce of key structures and public organizations like the 
Ministry of Digital Governance. This can include the creation of an AI Sandbox - testing and experimentation 
environment for public administrations to test and implement ambitious AI projects. This would be consistent 
with the AI platform that was described above.
The suggested implementation timeline is 24 months (i.e., M24).

8.2.3.4	RESOURCE ALLOCATION AND SUPPORT
AI algorithms can be used to efficiently cope with large datasets, to assign employees to complex tasks, to 
optimize the use of resources, to organize space and time in optimal ways. In case there is a lack of specialized 
people, AI algorithms can be used to support decision making and addressing repetitive tasks.
The suggested implementation timeline is 24 months (i.e., M24).

8.2.3.5	INTRODUCTION OF ROBOTIC PROCESS AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGIES
With the aim to reduce repetitive administrative tasks, Robotic Process Automation (RPA) is a business process 
automation technology that enables the automation of repetitive manual tasks that rely heavily on rules. The 
goal is to introduce RPA systems that will help public organizations save time and money by automating 
manual and repetitive tasks, improving accuracy and reducing the risk of human error. By using them, 
employees can focus on higher value tasks, automating repetitive tasks, while significant money savings can be 
achieved by extending the lifespan of older (legacy) information systems.
The suggested implementation timeline is 24 months (i.e., M24).
Action ST5.3: Reforming the Public Sector
Action Code: ST5.3
Key stakeholders: Government
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M12:  Setting-up operational digital infrastructures; using intelligent resource and manpower allocation in 
pilot implementation(s)
M24: Fully operational digital infrastructures empowered with AI technologies in public Administration; 
setting-up and using procedures for attracting AI talents and organising collaborations on AI projects 
collaborating across public administration and the academic and research communities; use of RPA 
technologies; smart resource allocation across the public domain
Links to other STs: ST1 (infrastructures), ST2 (R&D projects) 
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural
Indicative KPIs:  number of developed digital infrastructures; number of AI projects, talents and RPAs; 
number of organizations involved in smart resource allocation and contributing to projects  
Table 57: Information about ST5.3 (Reforming the Public Sector)
8.2.4	ACTION 4: GENERATING DIGITAL SKILLS FOR AI 
There is great need for awareness and Skills Training for Public Sector Employees, as well as for related actions 
addressing the needs of all AI stakeholders in the public, private and social domains. The described sub-
actions, which are presented in a broader framework within Strategic Target 2, are contextualized in the 
framework of the public sector below Specific sub-actions include: 
8.2.4.1	DIGITAL ABILITIES AND SKILLS FOR PUBLIC SERVANTS
The use of AI in the Public Sector presupposes the parallel development of the human resources and the 
strengthening of digital skills especially related to use of AI-enabled services. Digital skills in Public 
Administration are becoming more and more necessary, while at the same time requiring constant knowledge, 
information and continuous improvement. Public servants should become equipped with the skills needed to 
understand and use AI systems. In this direction, reference courses and training programs should be planned 
to provide basic knowledge about AI and its use in the public sector, including information on reference 
projects. In addition, the need to develop and provide e-services to citizens and businesses increases the 
demand for executives with a higher level of skills related to AI services offered by the Public Sector in the 
future. In this context, the upskilling activities for public employees described in ST2.2.3 are essential for a 
more efficient and citizen-friendly Public Sector. 
To reinforce these activities, the Ministry of Digital Governance needs to cooperate with all public 
administration organizations for coordination of actions, implementation of projects, provision of know-how, 
provision of materials and intangible resources, securing funding, conducting studies and horizontal provision 
of strategic directions and monitoring. Such organizations include the Ministries of Education, Labor & Social 
Affairs, Development and Investment, Rural Development as well as their supervised Organizations. Synergies 
should be also implemented with respective educational, research, professional bodies, social partners and 
natural persons who have distinguished themselves with their initiatives in digital technologies.
The suggested implementation timeline is 24 months (i.e., M24).

8.2.4.2	COLLABORATION PLATFORM
A basic condition for the substantial upgrade of digital skills related to AI in the Public Sector is the cooperation 
with the Ministry of Interior Affairs and with EKDDA, as a strategic training body for civil servants and 
employees of the Local Authorities, as well as with other respective educational institutions in the public and 
private sector. Through this cooperation, the education and training of public sector employees and executives 
is sought to be in line with the planned National Digital Skills Framework, which will be harmonized with the 
respective European Digital Capacity Framework (DigComp) system in conjunction with the DigComputer 
system. professions (ESCO). These collaborations will lead to a common framework of cooperation defining the 
type and form of planning and implementation of training actions for almost all civil servants and employees of 
the Local Authorities. 
The platform of the Digital Academy of Citizens can be the central coordination hub of all digital skills 
development, with the aim of wide-ranging digital actions for the acquisition of digital skills by the public 
sector, as well as the entire population. More specifically, it can act as a "Collaboration Platform" of digital 
education providers by coordinating, through a homogeneous national business logic, the action plan for the 
acquisition of digital skills related to AI, at basic, intermediate and advanced levels. 
The suggested implementation timeline is 24 months (i.e., M24).
Action ST5.4: Generating Digital Skills for AI
Action Code: ST5.4
Key stakeholders: Government
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M12:  Extending the Digital Academy of Citizens with AI-related content; first training programs for public 
servants; setting-up collaborations with training organisations, such EKDAA
M24: Collaboration platform on AI; implementation of skills' creation over the public sector and widely in 
the Greek society
Links to other STs:  ST2  
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural
Indicative KPIs:  number of AI training and skills' creation activities  
Table 58: Information about ST5.4 (Generating Digital Skills for AI)

8.2.5	ACTION 5:  AI AS A TECHNOLOGY ELEMENT IN PUBLIC SECTOR ACTIVITIES
AI can form the basic technology element for making public sector activities effective and efficient. Specific 
sub-actions in this framework include:
8.2.5.1	PUBLIC PROCUREMENT 
As AI becomes an essential and ubiquitous element of the systems procured by the government, it might 
become difficult to discern where AI technologies have been used in the design of a system. The government 
should have clear specifications about when an automation should be considered as AI, and thus the system 
comes under the monitoring of the Observatory and needs to satisfy AI-specific requirements for responsible, 
explainable, and auditable applications of AI.
The suggested implementation timeline is 24 months (i.e., M24).

8.2.5.2	FOSTERING PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS
Public private partnerships can be beneficial in the case of large-scale flagship projects. Such partnerships 
could serve as basis for enhancing existing projects with AI capabilities or for defining new projects in areas of 
top priority for the public sector, such as the development of AI centres and High Performance Computing 
(HPC) data centres for use by public and private sector enterprises, and the scaling up of reference projects 
(e.g., chatbots for front office) based on public-private partnerships.
The suggested implementation timeline is 24 months (i.e., M24).
Action ST5.5: AI as a Technology Element in Public Sector Activities
Action Code: ST5.5
Key stakeholders: Government
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M12:  Setting-up AI in Public Procurement and AI PPPs
M24: Organizing PPPs across the Public Sector and use of AI in Public Procurement
Links to other STs:  ST6 (procurement), ST4 (PPPs)  
Type of action: Operational
Indicative KPIs:  number of PPPs; full operational procurement   
Table 59: Information about ST5.5 (AI as a Technology Element in Public Sector Activities)

8.2.6	ACTION 6:  AI FOR GENERATING SMART AND SAFE PUBLIC ENVIRONMENTS
AI can be the basis for ensuring operation of public environments in smart and safe modes. Specific sub-
actions can boost the generation of such operational and social environments:
8.2.6.1	ENCOURAGING AI DEPLOYMENTS IN SMART CITIES
Supporting Greek (smart) cities in their efforts to become playgrounds for AI applications and to boost 
innovation based on advanced AI technologies should be targeted. The support could be provided based on 
funding programs, support in infrastructure development, as well as training and education programs. Actions 
could include organizing public tenders to select the top (e.g., top 3) most innovative cities based on AI; 
supporting the development of lighthouse AI projects (e.g., autonomous driving) in selected cities; supporting 
cities in the development of their AI related infrastructures (e.g., 5G, IoT, computing etc.).
The suggested implementation timeline is 24 months (i.e., M24).

8.2.6.2	 ADDRESSING THE OVERARCHING CLIMATE CRISIS
AI can assist in achieving reduction of food waste, as well as of generated CO2, reduction and better 
management of water and energy usage, ensuring efficiency and safety in the 'farm to fork' food production 
and supply chain. As a consequence, it can greatly assist the evolution of the Green economy in the country.
The suggested implementation timeline is 24 months (i.e., M24).

8.2.6.3	RISK AND ANOMALY PREDICTION RELATED TO CIVIL PROTECTION
The aim is to create ML systems that will be trained and powered by public data and will be able to predict the 
daily probability of different types of hazards, such as floods, cyclones, fires and road accidents. The systems 
will be able to calculate based on these probabilities the needs of each competent service in human and 
material resources and to propose optimized response plans. Moreover, building arbitrariness systems in 
forest areas and the coastal system that will use DL algorithms to detect building violations in protected areas, 
forests, and shores.
The suggested implementation timeline is 24 months (i.e., M24).
Action ST5.6: AI for Generating Smart and Safe Public Environments
Action Code: ST5.6
Key stakeholders: Government
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones:
M12:  First usages of AI in smart city development, in handling environmental crisis, in hazardous events 
prediction  
M24: An operational framework for safe and intelligent civil and public environments 
Links to other STs:  ST6 
Type of action: Operational/Infrastructural
Indicative KPIs:  number of AI deployments for safety and intelligence 
Table 60: Information about ST5.6 (AI for Generating Smart and Safe Public Environments)



 
9.	STRATEGIC TARGET 6 (ST6): ETHICAL, TRUSTWORTHY AND DEMOCRATIC AI FOR ALL

9.1	BACKGROUND, CHALLENGES, OPPORTUNITIES
9.1.1	INTRODUCTION
Among many other definitions, Artificial intelligence has been defined as "artificial mimicry of tasks and 
functions that would otherwise require human intelligence" [DBEIS17]. The most complex connotation of the 
term artificial intelligence ("General AI"), that of machines with human-like general intelligence, is still a 
distant vision. However, artificial intelligence in the more restricted sense defined above ("Narrow AI") is 
already broadly embedded in society in a variety of forms. The pace of development of new and improved 
artificial intelligence-based technologies is rapid; the question is no longer whether artificial intelligence will 
have an impact, but "by whom, how, where, and when this positive or negative impact will be felt." 
[Kosfeld05].
Discussions of the risks posed by artificial intelligence systems range from current concerns, such as violations 
of privacy, threats to individuals' autonomy/authority, and harmful effects on society, to debates about 
whether machines could ever escape from human control. For example, the use of AI technologies can 
tremendously benefit health care but at the same time raises several questions about whether the opacity of 
machine learning-based decisions weakens the authority of clinicians, threatens patients' autonomy or 
jeopardises decision-making between doctor and patient.
For this reason, the regulation of AI concerning all aspects of applications in real life settings dictate careful 
governance and regulatory mechanisms adopting a risk-based approach. AI should be considered as a way to 
improve human performance and generate added value in humanity through synergistic paradigms as for 
example the notion of Augmented intelligence. 
Although fully predicting the consequences of these technological developments is not possible, the need for 
thoughtful governance is evident. By applying our human intelligence, we can steer the development, uses, 
and impact of artificial intelligence in ways that accord with human values, increasing the benefits and 
mitigating the risks.
At the same time, trust is both a fundamental element of a society and a natural human tendency. According 
to neuroscience humans have an inherent tendency to trust and judge trustworthiness, which has biological 
causes [Kosfeld05]. From a sociological perspective "trust may be one of the most foundational attitudes or 
activities within human interaction and without it, many important social bonds would be jeopardised" 
[Ryan20]. A key property related to trust is trustworthiness - to be worthy of trust, as "being trustworthy helps 
in gaining trust" [Potter02]. Trustworthiness may not be the only factor for enhancing and acquiring trust (i.e., 
it may be supplemented with awareness and democratic principles such as participation and inclusion), but it 
is a necessary and important first step.
According to the European Commission's High-level Expert Group on AI (HLEG) [HLEG19] (p. 5) three 
components related to trustworthiness are proposed, that should be considered/applied during the entire 
lifecycle of an AI solution: (1) Lawfulness, the compliance to laws and regulations; (2) Ethicalness, the 
adherence to ethical principles and moral values and (3) Robustness, "both from a technical and social 
perspective" [HLEG19]. 
According to the same ethics guidelines, a holistic approach must be followed based on the harmonious and 
synergetic application of all three components on a) the AI technology and its inherent properties; b) to the 
actors behind development, deployment and use of an AI solution; and c) the AI solution's "socio-technical 
context throughout its entire life cycle" [HLEG19].
Besides the legal framework, the HLEG places ethics, moral values, technical robustness and robustness from a 
societal perspective to the forefront, as essential components for enhancing trust. Implementing these 
components is strongly tied to adhering to democratic principles and application of democratic processes. As 
members of a society, humans may be equipped with a "moral compass", guided by morality and our common 
ethical and moral values. However, historical evidence suggests that "some of our deepest and most 
intractable disputes are not about values or principles", "but about the world to which these principles apply" 
[Gaus16]. Suggesting that while we often agree on principles, "the differences lie in the social worlds to which 
we apply these values and principles: the way we interpret what we see around us" [Deloitte20]. For example, 
while there might be consensus on principles, i.e., that AI solutions should be ethical, fair and cause no harm, 
there may be disagreements on how to enact on these principles, and how these principles can be practically 
applied [Deloitte20]. One of the most powerful tools we have to resolve such disputes is democracy. 
Therefore, democratisation of AI may be proved a valuable component for achieving ethicalness and 
robustness under a societal context.

9.1.2	AIM AND OBJECTIVES 
The aim of this strategic target is to foster ethical, trustworthy and democratic AI, respecting the rights, 
freedoms, democratic values and welfare of humans and nature at all times; to place AI technology at the 
service of people, society and the environment based on values that we share. Values that should guide the 
ongoing evolution of AI, safeguarding the wellbeing of humans and nature, while protecting human autonomy 
and freedom. Values that go beyond AI regulation and which we need to co-design with Ethos-in-AI acting as a 
moral code for AI. 
Towards this aim, this effort encompasses AI systems, humans, and the natural environment and has the 
following objectives that are in accordance with the principles of the Berlin Declaration. Specifically:  
About AI systems:
*	Promote the research development and deployment of AI that is infused with the human rights, 
freedoms, and values of Democracy, and the welfare of humans and nature (socially-good-by-design and 
environmentally-friendly-by-design), built on fundamental principles including fairness, inclusiveness, 
safety and privacy
*	Promote accountable systems, i.e., AI systems that provide appropriate opportunities for feedback, 
relevant explanations, and appeal, and are subject to appropriate human direction and control, as well as 
encourage architectures with privacy safeguards, that provide appropriate transparency and control over 
the use of data.
*	Create the necessary frameworks and methods for assessing (a) the impact (including the socially good 
and environmentally friendliness) of AI systems and projects, (b) the associated risks (envisioned and/or 
emerging risks such as the risk of creating new forms of bias), and (c) likely uses, including how closely an 
AI solution is related to or adaptable to a harmful use and limit potentially harmful or abusive 
applications.
*	Shape new laws, norms, and standards to ensure that the promise of AI technology is realized for the 
benefit of society at large as well as provision actions in case of bias, abuse, malicious behavior etc.
*	Create the necessary regulatory processes to govern when and how these systems can be deployed in 
different sectors, such as healthcare, security, energy, transportation, manufacturing, and entertainment. 

About Humans:
*	Create an AI culture that enables all stakeholders, from the general public to scientists using AI tools, 
organizations adapting AI technologies and policy makers, to understand the uses, benefits as well as the 
risks and implications of these technologies in general as well as per domain and application (e.g., health 
care).
*	Foster responsible, participatory governance and establish rules for enacting ethical, trustworthy and 
democratic AI, as well as defining roles and responsibilities for stakeholders involved in this effort, 
including the general public, to build, use and react to AI technologies responsibly (collective 
responsibility).
*	Create the necessary frameworks not only for accountable AI systems but for people to be accountable for 
AI systems.
About the Environment:
*	Foster a sustainable AI-enabled future that benefits society and the natural environment. This entails the 
adoption of a value-based culture for AI development and use that is ethical and democratic-by-design , 
as well as socially-good-and environmentally-friendly-by-design. 

9.1.3	RELEVANT INITIATIVES 
Currently one can identify a vibrant community and several scattered initiatives that focus on the ethical, legal 
and trustworthy issues around AI (e.g., Delphi Forum, AI4EU conference, Quo Vadis AI, etc). However, a 
coordinated approach is needed in order to create the necessary conditions and enablers that will foster an 
open, multi-disciplinary and multi-stakeholder community and will empower them to co-create the ethical, 
trustworthy and democratic guidelines aligned with the fundamental rights, freedoms, values of our society.

9.1.4	OPPORTUNITIES FOR GREECE 
The key opportunities for Greece can be summarised, as follows: 
*	Emphasis on ethical, legal, trustworthy AI at a EU level as well as among like-minded countries and 
relevant initiatives.
*	Democratic values are seen, at an international level, as the common ground that unites countries across 
the world and upon which solid AI principles can be created. The Global Partnership on AI (GPAI) focuses 
on promoting responsible AI use that respects human rights and democratic values. 
*	Moving from principles to practice. At the moment the global spotlight is on the operationalisation of the 
Ethical Principles for Trustworthy AI into practical, actionable frameworks and tools to facilitate this 
transition. 
*	Need for participatory social shaping of technology in a democratised way. AI-driven innovation and 
digital transformation should be driven in collaboration with citizens and all relevant stakeholders, in an 
inclusive and participatory way and under a democratised approach. This ascertains the effective adoption 
of appropriate and efficient, human-centric systems, boosting the impact of innovation horizontally across 
domains of application.
*	Need for an AI audit system. There is a need not only to create but also to practice the highest level of 
standards for ethical, trustworthy, democratic AI across the private and the public sector. Safeguarding 
this way the rights, freedoms and our shared values.
*	Greece offers a unique setting to identify the intricacies of human-centric, ethical AI research, 
development and application. This fact stems from the geographic position of Greece and the related 
population influx that has occurred for several years. This mosaic of cultures, values and ethical bases 
make Greece an ideal place to develop the processes for mutual understanding and co-creation of AI, 
which can then be transferred to the wider, multilingual, multi-cultural EU environment.
*	Since AI can and should be developed in a democratic manner, through sustainable democratic processes, 
Greece can utilise its strong conceptual connection to Democracy to fulfil this requirement. This 
connection also offers a unique opportunity for branding Greece as the birthplace of Democracy 2.0, in 
essence and in action. Such awareness will facilitate the communication and the dissemination of the 
related know-how that will be developed, creating a unique position for Greece in the global AI spectrum.
*	Greece has a unique, post-crisis setting -through two consecutive crises- which pushes for innovation 
across all domains of activity. Democratisation is the way to ascertain that this innovation, and the socio-
economic and cultural structures that will emerge from this, remain aligned to the EU value system, while 
empowering financial development. This empowerment will be facilitated if "AI made in Greece" is 
directly connected to trustworthy, human-centric, ethics-by-design, democratically co-created AI, which 
creates a unique selling proposition in itself.

9.1.5	CHALLENGES TO OVERCOME
Enhancing the adoption of AI and harnessing its full potential for the benefit of all, necessitates that we 
address several challenges. 
*	Trust-related challenges. These challenges may be caused by ambiguity or lack of information and 
incomplete knowledge around AI. This can diminish the benefits of technology for people, and reduce 
industry's involvement in AI driven innovation taking into account their customers perception and 
potential engagement with AI apps, data sharing practices, etc. Building trust in AI and creating the 
necessary conditions (e.g., protection of data, rights, freedoms and values as well as the processes that 
will enable transparent, explainable and accountable AI innovation) is a prerequisite.  
*	Address potential negative AI challenges. Although AI holds a great economic, social, and environmental 
promise, there are potential negative AI challenges that we need to address. These challenges include 
ethical, social, democratic, legal and regulatory ones. Understanding and addressing these challenges is a 
critical aspect. 
*	Ensuring fundamental-rights, freedoms and democratic values are protected at all times. The ability of 
AI to realise its full potential, depends on the way that we will choose to seize this opportunity and 
address the challenges that relate among others to the protection of the fundamental rights, the 
freedoms and democratic values. 
*	Legal challenges. Some indicative challenges in this are the proliferation of laws, regulations, guidelines 
and principles. The lack of communication between regulators and makers. The inability to keep pace with 
the technological pace. Therefore, ensuring appropriate legal frameworks is a key requirement for the 
trustworthy, responsible and democratic AI adoption and use. 
Based on the aforementioned opportunities and taking into account the barriers that we need to overcome, a 
number of sub-objectives of this Strategic Target are defined. 
These focus on creating trust in AI and fostering a participatory value-based AI Culture that will strengthen the 
active involvement of civil society in the social shaping of AI systems that will be value-based, fair, inclusive 
and democratic. Emphasis is also placed on promoting the development and use of ethical, trustworthy and 
democratic AI frameworks, that enable and ensure the responsible use of AI that respects and preserves 
fundamental rights, freedoms and shared values of humans and nature without inhibiting the power of AI. This 
is followed by ensuring the right AI Audit mechanisms that will foster trust. 

9.2	ST6 ACTIONS PLAN
9.2.1	ACTION 1: LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR ETHICAL AND DEMOCRATIC AI
Having already signed up for the digital transformation with recently introduced regulatory instruments like 
the Bible of Digital Transformation and L.4727/2020 on Digital Governance, Greece understands that 
traditional notions of law, practices and the underlying technical architecture need to be transferred to the 
digital. Such a shift requires a bold but realistic refinement of the regulatory framework on AI and related 
technologies. To reach a satisfactory boldness/realism ratio, Greece needs to unpack and explore AI, ethics 
and the law as a complex system and create an informed AI regulatory landscape, designed through agile 
navigation among inherent tensions (i.e. privacy vs. free flow of data, ownership vs. control, quality vs volume, 
ethics centric vs. human rights centric). Such unpacking does not necessarily imply a new regulatory 
framework, rather a collective understanding of the core values the Greek society seeks to optimise and the 
operational bearings thereof. It does not require a monotonous hook to legal concepts 'as is', rather a rational 
adaptation.
Nowadays we are witnessing, at European level, basic regulatory building blocks making their way to the field 
or reserving a seat in the pipeline. These blocks attempt to reflect the reposition of values in the AI and wider 
information structures. Referencing the European approach, Greece should focus on modelling what could 
and/or should be, the ethical and democratic AI design or Democracy 2.0 blueprint, Greece has the ambition 
to come up with. The present ST6 proposes a holistic approach from philosophical engineering to ethical 
filtering to targeted rulemaking through a set of measured action items that aim at generating practical 
outcomes of added value. As such, the regulatory focus should initially identify qualities and principles and 
then shift to testing, implementation, -auditing and further refinement. This virtuous cycle will allow Greece to 
elaborate on pressing issues and to identify the proper performative elements for its alternative safe AI future. 
The following list is a mix of recommendations for a holistic research, development and management of AI 
technologies, their ethical reasoning, cultural approval, functional consistency, technical documentation and 
their implications thereof. 

9.2.1.1	SUB ACTION 1.1. CREATE AN INFORMED AI REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Establish a cluster of interdisciplinary working groups, each one focused on different thematic areas but with 
democratic values at the very core. The working groups shall form a network of collaboration and the primary 
objective shall be to: a) map and catalogue laws and their inherent guiding principles and values per thematic 
domain, sector or selected systems; b) interpret the identified framework per thematic domain and 
benchmark the existing -system- requirements (b1) against the emerging -system- requirements, following the 
AI transition (b2); c) identify unregulated areas and blind spots; d) identify legal updates/revisions or new 
legislation and ensure they fit for purpose; e) identify the implications for researchers, developers and 
manufacturers, deployers, operators and users of AI services and products thereof; f) identify whether such 
updates/revisions are genuinely necessary according to the emerging requirements of the thematic domain, 
sector  or selected system in question; g) shape the requirements accordingly; h) configure the limitations 
imposed by 'heavy' legal concepts like intellectual property, data protection and privacy according to the set 
requirements by introducing proper derogations and/or bold modifications.
An umbrella body in the form of an 'AI Auditing Body' (fully aligned with Action 2 and ST5) that will a) harvest 
all findings and insights, b) articulate the impact of AI on the democratic standards defined by the AI Politeia 
and vice versa, c) report, d) provide targeted recommendations on guidelines, soft law practices and further 
calibrations on legal requirements, ethical principles in line with the identified democratic standards. The 
Hellenic AI Task Force will open communication channels with the AI Dialogues Platform (sub-action 3.2.) and 
extract inputs from the Ethical and Democratic AI Toolkit (Action 7).
The primary output shall be an applicable democracy framework relevant to the AI reality.
At a second stage, the interdisciplinary working group input and the Hellenic Task Force output will blend in a 
circular mode to:
*	Operationalise the identified guiding principles and values in AI models by introducing metrics, 
benchmarks, thresholds etc so as to ensure quality and actualisation in a safe fashion;
*	Research and develop hands on AI solutions and simulations for maximum legal and regulatory 
enforcement in context (explainability, transparency, auditability, non-maleficence, non-bias, inclusion 
and participation);
*	Design, introduce and apply participatory and democratic oversight procedures at large in collaboration 
with AI Politeia and AI Auditing Body; this includes the AI architecture choices and the algorithmic 
appropriations;
*	Foster the appropriate regulatory framework for AI driven decisions, products and services;
*	Align with and actualise the Berlin Declaration on Digital Society with emphasis on democratic design. 
The overall action is recommended to take place under the mindset that: a) full reliance on pre-AI legal 
concepts and protections may prevent us from our alternative future and b) simply regulating the 'what' with 
no reference to the 'how' may prove a substantial barrier and generate unnecessary delays towards AI 
maturity. As such the present strategy strongly recommends avoiding massive regulatory limitations, investing 
in learning by doing and developing relative maturity models on applied frameworks. The AI Register (sub-
section 4.1.) could be a valuable tool in this process, providing data and information inputs, while targeted 
regulatory sandboxes (action 6) would offer the necessary experimentation space.
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.1.1: Create an Informed AI Regulatory Framework
Action Code: ST6.1.1
Key stakeholders: Legal Professionals, Policy makers, Start-ups, Researchers, Philosophers, Ethicists, 
Computer Scientists, AI Auditing Body, AI Observatory
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
M6: Working Group formation  
M12: Open consultation and workshops 
M24: Revised version of the AI Regulatory Framework (for the public and private sectors) & impact 
assessment study  
Links to other STs: ST6
Type of action: Legal/Regulatory, Advisory
Indicative KPIs: number of network stakeholders; number of reports/policy suggestions 
Table 61: Information about Action ST6.1.1 (Create an Informed AI Regulatory Framework)

9.2.1.2	SUB ACTION 1.2. EMBED LEGAL REQUIREMENTS AND ETHICAL PRINCIPLES IN NATIONAL AI 
INFRASTRUCTURES (IN LINE WITH ST1)
Following the governing structure as set in sub action 1.1. identify the emerging properties of the new (fair) 
data economy and explicitly explore the actualisation of the Data Governance Act Proposal. Focus on the 'how' 
to use and re-use (i.e., sharing mechanisms, interoperability, standards, governance) for the public benefit, 
financial growth and societal well-being. Ensure high value data and fit for purpose open/close mergers. 
Enhance collaboration and data sharing between asymmetric partners. The Bible of Digital Transformation 
(sections 5 and 6) provides an appropriate formalistic framework towards the above ends.
*	Consider contributing to relative projects of international interest from abroad (i.e., IHAN project) and 
support international bilateral or multilateral synergies on selected regulatory grounds.
*	Consider updates/revisions to critical legal frameworks to: a) calibrate data generation and sharing with 
emphasis on text and data mining permissions for training model purposes; b) ensure provenance and 
traceability for minimum distortion; c) follow the algorithmic chain for maximum transparency and 
roles/liability tracking (including automated decision making). 
*	Test-bed training data, models and algorithms within appropriate sandboxes. 
*	Design and test risk assessment mechanisms for the use of personal data and anonymous data within the 
data governance framework. 
*	Identify generic and custom quality standards and safety measures. 
*	Define the AI commons; Design a set of normative reciprocity appropriations, collective management 
tools and governance models. Streamline AI commons with Open Science framework in regard to data, ML 
models and infrastructures, so as to ensure maximum value creation while respecting the governance of 
the commons and avoid enclosure and value capture when not part of the game. 
*	Identify the role of tech giants in the AI commons production, enclosure and capture and regulate 
accordingly.
*	Ensure the maximum adoption of the Open Source Software Strategy 2020-2023 of the Commission.
*	Deploy an extended actualisation and enforcement plan in regard to L.4577/2018 for network and 
information security (the NIS law).
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.1.2: Embed Legal Requirements and Ethical Principles
 in National AI Infrastructures
Action Code: ST6.1.2
Key stakeholders: Legal Professionals, Policy makers, Start-ups, Researchers, Philosophers, Ethicists, 
Computer Scientists, AI Auditing Body, AI Observatory
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
M6: Working Group formation  
M12: Open consultation and workshops 
M24: Revised version of the AI Regulatory Framework (for the public and private sectors) & impact 
assessment study  
Links to other STs: ST6
Type of action: Legal/Regulatory, Advisory
Indicative KPIs: number of compliant national infrastructures (against the framework); level of awareness 
of infrastructure providers about ethical AI principles
Table 62: Information about Action ST6.1.2 (Embed Legal Requirements and Ethical Principles in National AI 
Infrastructures)

9.2.1.3	SUB ACTION 1.3. FRAMEWORK INTERVENTIONS IN AI RESEARCH, EDUCATION & SKILL 
CAPITAL (STRATEGIC TARGET 2)
This sub-action includes the following areas: 
*	Establish an Educational Innovation Committee with primary objectives to:
o	Extend the scope of L.4692/2020 on educational reform. 
o	Introduce and support ethics by design modules in legal and computer science curricula. Focus on 
interdisciplinary methods of related learning by blending technology, ethics, philosophy, 
economics, arts and the law. 
o	Introduce wider programs for advancing digital literacy, vertical professional training and future 
of work. 
o	Train the trainers. 
o	Generate AI projects in arts, humanities and social sciences in the context of other proposed 
actions in the context of ST6.
*	Establish a High Skilled Immigration Act to attract international talent, while providing incentives towards 
expats' (Rebrain initiative). 
*	Establish a Citizen Science Authority responsible for overseeing, coordinating, and incentivizing (e.g., via 
competition prizes) Citizen Science and crowdsourcing initiatives that engage the Greek public in 
addressing societal needs and accelerating science, technology, and innovation. This will enable the 
creation of a citizen science and crowdsourcing community in Greece and democratise citizen-driven value 
co-creation for science, policy, environment, and society at large. More details about the support of 
Citizen Science initiatives can be found in ST2.
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.1.3: Framework Interventions in AI Research, Education & Skill Capital
Action Code: ST6.1.3
Key stakeholders: Legal Professionals, Policy makers, Start-ups, Researchers, Philosophers, Ethicists, 
Computer Scientists, AI Auditing Body, AI Observatory
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
 M6: AI Educational Innovation Committee.
 M12: Revised training programs and educational curricula for public educational institutes;  
Links to other STs: ST2
Type of action: Legal/Regulatory, Operational, Advisory, Financing 
Indicative KPIs: number of educational and research activities undertaken; number of initiatives and 
projects supervised by the new institutional bodies
Table 63: Information about Action ST6.1.3 (Framework Interventions in AI Research, Education & Skill Capital)

9.2.1.4	SUB ACTION 1.4. FRAMEWORK INTERVENTIONS IN NATIONAL AI INNOVATION ECOSYSTEM 
& ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION GROWTH (IN LINE WITH ST3 & ST4)
This sub-action includes the following activities:
*	Identify a national flagship pilot project of regulatory interest (i.e., consent management) and scaleup 
internationally.
*	Introduce sectoral/community AI strategies and provide vertical ethical and legal contextualisations, so as 
to avoid broad, one size fits all principles and regulatory frameworks.
*	Avoid heavy regulatory mandates in terms of functionality rather create the room for soft development. 
Develop an AI ethics compliance certification scheme (i.e., data intermediaries, data sharing services, AI 
transparency, explainability and fairness etc) through an AI Certifications Program (that will be established 
as part of the AI Auditing Body, see Action 2) and explore the interoperability among selected 
international certification schema. 
*	Conduct small scale experiments on the impact of AI in selected sectors taking into account the relative 
impact on moral values, ethics, human rights, democracy and the rule of law. Focus on digital democracy 
within information society. 
*	Aim at preserving the Greek language in digital space and enhance AI applications operating on Greek 
language resources (i.e., Greek AI assistance, Greek voice/text translations etc).  
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.1.4: Framework interventions in National AI Innovation Ecosystem & Economic 
Transformation Growth
Action Code: ST6.1.4
Key stakeholders: Legal Professionals, Policy makers, Start-ups, Researchers, Philosophers, Ethicists, 
Computer Scientists, AI Auditing Body, AI Observatory
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
M6: Flagship pilot project launch
M6: High Skilled Immigration Act draft
M12: Enter in bilateral/multilateral cooperation agreements
M18: Flagship pilot project international scale up
Links to other STs: Horizontally across all STs
Type of action: Legal/Regulatory, Advisory, Operational
Indicative KPIs: number of adopters of the certification program
Table 64: Information about Action ST6.1.4 (Framework interventions in National AI Innovation Ecosystem & 
Economic Transformation Growth)

9.2.2	ACTION 2: A NATIONAL AI AUDITING BODY 
AI technologies will continue to diffuse across society. While updating old and creating new legal frameworks 
is necessary, there is a need for an agile, interdisciplinary body to ensure that AI systems, deployed in the 
public and private sector, meet the necessary high ethical, legal, and democratic standards. Therefore, a 
National AI Auditing Body will be formed. This body will be similar in terms of design and responsibilities to 
ethical committees in other widespread scientific and technological fields (e.g., bioethics committees). It will 
provide the requirements and auditing frameworks for AI systems in regard to trustworthiness and 
accountability, while assessing their compliance with the necessary ethical, democratic, and legal principles. It 
will act as the national advisory committee on the development and implementation of artificial intelligence 
and will provide the required mechanisms to establish broad policy and legal principles for AI. The government 
can receive advice from this body on ways to optimize the development of AI, to support the unbiased 
development and application AI, and to protect the fundamental rights, freedoms, and democratic values. 
An AI Auditing Framework will be developed so as to support the work of the Auditing Body, when assessing 
the compliance of developing, testing and deploying AI systems (AI lifecycle) across different application areas 
and industrial domains. It will take into account existing efforts in the area that focus on the practical 
implementation of ethical guidelines (i.e., the AI HLEG Assessment list for Trustworthy AI (ALTAI, 2020)), data 
compliance of AI systems (i.e., the AI Auditing Framework (ICO, 2019)), and the model process for addressing 
ethical concerns during system design (IEEE P7000 standards), among others.  A necessary part of this 
framework will be the compilation of AI related terminology and its definitions (e.g., what may be considered 
as automated weaponry) thus clarifying what technologies should be watched over by the AI Auditing Body. 
The creation of such a glossary would have the added value of ensuring the translation and coining of foreign 
AI related jargon in Greek and vice versa. Additionally, the AI Auditing Framework will contain general 
heuristics and guidelines regarding the AI ethical auditing procedure of AI technologies and organisations 
employing them.
The AI Auditing body will provide "AI Certifications" to public and private sector AI projects, tools, systems and 
services aiming to foster trust and promote responsible, ethical, trustworthy and democratic AI innovation. 
The Auditing Body will conduct frequent impact assessment studies of the AI audits, in order to identify the 
impact on competitiveness as well as on social trustworthiness.
Moreover, to ensure and maintain the democratisation of AI, the AI Auditing Body should be in close contact 
with citizens through public outreach programs, public discussions and debates, and the release of policy 
papers for public consultation. This can be achieved through the "AI Dialogues" platform (sub action 3.2) and 
will help assure that citizens are in the loop of AI development and that regulators and technologists alike 
receive feedback from the public, safeguarding and preserving democratic AI.
More information about the planning of this action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.2: A National AI Auditing Body
Action Code: ST6.2
Key stakeholders: Researchers, private sector entities, Centres, public sector entities, regulators and legal 
officers 
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
M4: Auditing Body structure and initial responsibilities are established
M6: Auditing Body formation 
M12: Initial AI Auditing Frameworks to be developed (for the public and private sectors)  
M14: Open consultation and workshops 
M24: Revised version of the AI Auditing Framework (for the public and private sectors) & impact 
assessment study  
Links to other STs: Horizontally across all STs
Type of action: Legal/Regulatory, Advisory
Indicative KPIs:  No. of AI Audits, No. of AI certifications
Table 65: Information about Action ST6.2 (A National AI Auditing Body)

9.2.3	ACTION 3: GENERAL AI AWARENESS
AI is able to realise tremendous benefits for economic growth and prosperity but at the same time it presents 
new broad and complex challenges that are unprecedented compared with previous technologies. It is 
necessary that the wider public is an active member of the discussions and constructive dialogues around AI 
ethics, values, social impacts, technology policy and governance so as to ensure the legitimacy and quality of 
technology, safeguarding that AI works for the benefit of people, society and nature. 
In the context of advancing AI education, upskilling of workforce (see ST2), and inclusion of the public in the AI 
discourse through actions of the AI Auditing Body (see action 2) this action aims to further foster general AI 
awareness and public deliberation and societal debate around AI. Besides the public campaigns to foster 
awareness, trust and democratisation of AI described in ST2 as part of the coordinated upskilling activities, the 
following sub-actions can further contribute to these targets:

9.2.3.1	SUB-ACTION 3.1: "AI DIALOGUES" PLATFORM
Aiming to foster an active dialogue around AI and foster a participatory social shaping of technology in a 
democratised way, a citizens' AI dialogues platform will be created. The platform will be part of the National 
Digital Academy and will include a public feedback system where individuals could provide their feedback in 
relation to specific ethical issues, AI regulations, issues related to transparency and trustworthiness, etc to 
trigger discussions and active AI dialogue. In order to ensure an inclusive and equal representation of all civil 
society segments, including minorities, non-technology savvy individuals, and vulnerable members of our 
society, specialised physical workshops will be conducted, either by inviting members of these communities 
and/or via representative organisations (NGOs, researchers, experts, etc) that can provide the views of these 
community members. In addition, a social web observatory will extract public opinion related to AI at a 
national level (via AI tools) in order to ensure that the AI dialogue themes are centred around issues that are 
important for civil society.
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.3.1: "AI Dialogues" Platform
Action Code: ST6.3.1
Key stakeholders: Researchers, private sector entities, Centres, public sector entities, regulators and legal 
officers
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
M11: Design and develop the AI dialogues platform & public feedback system 
M12: Official launch of the platform
M16: Early impact Assessment of the platform 
M24: Final iterations of the platform 
Links to other STs: Horizontally across all STs
Type of action: Operational/Social/Democratic/Empowerment
Indicative KPIs: No. of participants, No. of AI dialogues conducted, No. of AI discussion themes, participant 
engagement, etc
Table 66: Information about Action ST6.3.1 ("AI Dialogues" Platform)

9.2.3.2	SUB-ACTION 3.2: AI DEMOCRATISATION BAROMETER
An 'AI Democratisation Barometer' will be designed and deployed, for measuring AI Democratisation 
performance at a national and international scale. A special index will be created that will measure the 
characteristics of AI Democratisation across counties in order to facilitate the comparative analyses and 
benchmark countries commitment towards responsible, trustworthy and democratized AI innovation. 
Dedicated experts' workshops will be conducted and scoring exercises will be designed in order to co-define 
the key AI Democratisation parameters and assess their scoring potential, aiming to produce a collective 
intelligence index.
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.3.2: AI Democratisation Barometer
Action Code: ST6.3.2
Key stakeholders: Researchers, private sector entities, Centres, public sector entities, regulators and legal 
officers
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
M7: Initial version of the AI Democratisation Barometer Index 
M12: Official launch of the Barometer covering the ratings for Year 2021
M24: Assessments of Year 2022 (yearly assessment)
Links to other STs: Horizontally across all STs
Type of action: Advisory/Social/Democratic
Indicative KPIs: Index validation, No. of countries assessed
Table 67: Information about Action ST6.3.2 (AI Democratisation Barometer)

9.2.3.3	SUB-ACTION 3.3: "AI FOR GOOD" FLAGSHIP PROJECT 
Create a "flagship" high-impact AI-project that will be based on a participatory, citizen-driven social and/or 
environmental cause, facilitating the collaboration and co-creation of diverse stakeholder segments ensuring 
diversity of opinion and inclusiveness among others.  This will be part of National AI for Good initiative, 
targeting different stakeholder communities (i.e., for scientists, for Centres- AI social entrepreneurship, for 
education, for citizens, etc) and will create linkages with other EU countries and initiatives (i.e., France, Ireland, 
NGI European Commission, etc) supporting the similar high-impact causes for good, tackling for example 
climate change or social inequality, among others. Such projects could be supported through public and 
private sponsorships, as well as government programs.
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.3.3: "AI for Good" Flagship Project
Action Code: ST6.3.3
Key stakeholders: Citizens, NGOs, civil society organisations, Researchers, private sector entities, Centres, 
public sector entities, regulators and legal officers
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
M6: Launch of the AI awareness campaign to inform citizens about this flagship project and the ways that 
they can participate in order to denote their preferred cause 
M10: Official launch of the citizen-driven AI for Good Flagship project (14 months project)
M15: Initial impact assessment (initial 7 months) and AI awareness campaigns to inform the general public  
M24: Final impact assessment and AI awareness campaigns to inform the general public  
Links to other STs: Horizontally across all STs
Type of action: Operational, Social
Indicative KPIs: Impact of the AI4Good project (social, environmental impact etc), social engagement
Table 68: Information about Action ST6.3.3 ("AI for Good" Flagship Project)
	
9.2.4	ACTION 4: PROJECT SPECIFIC AI AWARENESS
An AI solution may benefit and affect a society in multiple ways, and while societies seem to consent and 
adhere to similar principles, moral and ethical values, consensus on how these principles should be practically 
applied can be difficult. Morality, being an individual construct, along with subjectivity on how each one of us 
interprets the world around us create multiple and diverse "social worlds" within a society. One of the most 
powerful tools to resolve disputes and acquire consensus (a prerequisite to achieve trustworthiness) is to 
adhere to the democratic principles, values, standards and processes, striving for participation and inclusion. 
Communities or "social worlds" may be differently affected by different AI solutions, both in benefits and 
opportunities but also in risks involved. This suggests that a general approach may not be fit for all cases, and 
project/solution specific approaches should be additionally used, in order to cater for all affected stakeholder 
and different views. Thus, project-specific AI awareness procedures should be followed in all phases of the 
implementation of an AI solution, including how and what stakeholders are selected (and the community is 
defined), how a solution is communicated and what procedure is followed to refine a solution.
The aim of this Strategic Action will be to foster project-specific AI awareness for each of the AI funded 
projects within the National AI Strategy. The key aspects that will be examined for each AI-project will include, 
among others: the benefits and impacts, the legal, ethical, democratic, explainability and inclusiveness, how 
non-bias and non-discrimination aspects will be addressed, how privacy will be preserved, rights and freedoms 
will be respected.
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.4: Project Specific AI Awareness
Action Code: ST6.4
Key stakeholders: Civil society, AI solution providers, government, private sector, research & academia
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
M10: Design and develop the platform & public feedback system 
M12: Official launch of the platform
M16: Early impact Assessment of the platform 
M24: Final iterations of the platform 
Links to other STs: Horizontally across all STs
Type of action: Operational, Social
Indicative KPIs: No. of project-specific AI awareness campaigns (at least for all AI-projects that will be 
implemented during 2021-2022)
Table 69: Information about Action ST6.4 (Project Specific AI Awareness)

9.2.4.1	SUB-ACTION 4.1: AI REGISTER FOR THE AI PROJECTS AT A CITY-LEVEL/GREEK CITIES AI 
REGISTER
The objective of the 'AI Register' will be to provide information about the usage of AI systems and algorithms 
that are deployed across Greek cities (and across the public sector). The register will aim to grant citizens a 
better understanding of the AI projects and algorithms (all algorithms to be transparent and explainable) that 
are used, the data used and how they will be processed, how ethical and democratic principles will be ensured, 
the values respected by these systems, how risks will be handled, how discrimination will be prevented, the 
degree of human oversight, and the envisioned impact on society among others. 
This will be a voluntary transparency act on regional AI projects (and across all public sector projects) using 
algorithms that have a significant influence on critical decisions affecting individuals. This transparency 
approach is essential for building a trust in Artificial Intelligence and will thus complement the other actions 
towards this aim. Following the example of other European cities, like Amsterdam and Helsinki, the 'Greek 
Cities AI Register' will aim to show how cities use algorithms and AI systems in a transparent, trustworthy, 
ethical and democratic way. With the underlying aim to foster trust and engage and empower citizens to 
participate, by providing their feedback and contributing to the creation of human-centered, ethical and 
democratic AI.
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.4.1: AI Register for the AI projects at a city-level/Greek Cities AI Register
Action Code: ST6.4.1
Key stakeholders: Citizens, municipalities, public sector entities, civil servants, researchers, private sector 
entities
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
M11: Design and development of the AI Register 
M12: Official launch of the platform
M16: Initial AI projects to be included & AI Awareness campaigns at a municipality level to be initiated 
M24: Updated list of AI projects & linked AI Awareness campaigns 
Links to other STs: Horizontally across all STs
Type of action: Operational, Social, Democratic/Transparency
Indicative KPIs: No. AI projects, No. of cities that participate, No. of visitors (& visitor engagement levels)
Table 70: Information about Action ST6.4.1 (AI Register for the AI projects at a city-level/Greek Cities AI 
Register)

9.2.5	ACTION 5: AI LITERACY PROJECT IN THE NATIONAL DIGITAL ACADEMY
Given the current hype around the technology, there is a great amount of disinformation and fear associated 
with its use. This noise often leads to unjustified fear and exaggerated perception and expectations by people, 
or, even worse, to the underestimation of its potential for good and for harm. Trying to disprove unjustified 
claims and conspiracy theories around AI drains a lot of energy and drives away the attention from the real 
ethical problems associated with the new technology. It also affects policy makers and the public opinion, 
creating unnecessary hurdles on research and funding. To address this issue, significant effort should be 
allocated to addressing "AI literacy", i.e., properly informing the general public on both the potential of, and 
the dangers associated with AI and providing routes of action to mitigate identified risks and challenges and 
increase trust. 
This National AI Literacy Project will be part of the National Digital Academy and will focus on breaking the AI 
knowledge barrier for civil society. This project will democratise AI knowledge by opening cross-thematic AI 
knowledge and facilitating knowledge-acquisition for all societal segments. This entails initially the provision of 
relevant AI knowledge (open knowledge) to all civil society segments, acknowledging the specific needs of 
each community group and the needs of the vulnerable members of our society. 
Furthermore, in order to democratise AI knowledge, it is essential to not only diffuse knowledge and expertise, 
but also to ensure accessibility (open access) to the digital AI resources and facilitate knowledge acquisition. In 
order for this to be achieved, dedicated AI courses and training material will be created, addressing for all 
stakeholder groups via educational curricula and public awareness activities for AI, and the envisioned societal, 
legal and ethical impact of AI. These courses will be developed in collaboration with the academic community 
and prominent European and International initiatives (Elements of AI, etc). Another crucial component of AI 
knowledge democratisation is the nurturing of an inclusive, constructive, on-going AI- dialogue (e.g., via 
structured public consultations, hands-on challenges, and gamified approaches) that will amplify existing 
knowledge, infuse society with new insights and facilitate the co-creation of shared values, ethical principles, 
policies, standards, among others. Towards this aim specialised strategic actions have been included. 
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.5: AI Literacy Project in the National Digital Academy
Action Code: ST6.5
Key stakeholders: civil society, academia, public sector, private sector
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
M12: At least one AI course for the general public
M24: At least one additional AI course for a specific segment of the society
Links to other STs: ST2
Type of action: Educational, Social, Democratic, Empowerment
Indicative KPIs: No. of AI courses, No. of participants
Table 71: Information about Action ST6.5 (AI Literacy Project in the National Digital Academy)
9.2.6	ACTION 6: SANDBOX FOR TRUSTWORTHY AND DEMOCRATIC AI
The disruptive nature of Artificial Intelligence revolutionises existing technologies and practices. AI applications 
and services are becoming more common at an accelerating rate, pointing towards new directions that may 
have highly significant economic, social, environmental impacts upon our current and future societies. 
However, these impacts are difficult to anticipate mainly due to their dynamic nature and innovative 
character. 
This unique AI sandbox will cover this need while promoting the Greek AI model- for experimenting and 
fostering AI democratisation in a sustainable way, under an ethical, trustworthy and democratised approach 
for the benefit of all and for the shared common good. This novel environment will enable researchers, 
practitioners, policy makers and legal and regulatory auditors to experiment and test novel technical and non-
technical propositions, AI solutions and AI governance frameworks that will foster a value-driven and 
responsible approach to AI innovation across sectors.  
It will be a controlled, trusted environment for experimenting and examining the societal, ethical, democratic 
as well as legal, regulatory, technical AI components of AI systems focusing both on the current and future use 
and impact of AI; aiming to make our digital societies (current and future ones) fairer, more ethical and more 
democratic by design. The sandbox can be actively utilised in order to design, develop and implement other 
Strategic Actions in this and other Strategic Targets. It will also be complementary to the AI testing and 
experimentation facilities (see ST1 and ST3). The latter will serve technical experimentation while the AI 
sandboxes would cover ethical, humanitarian, and legal experimentation
For example, citizen-science AI projects (Strategic Target 2) could utilise this sandbox in order to conduct 
experiments (democratising AI experimentation) enhancing further its value-adding potential across scientific 
(computer science, social sciences, humanities, arts, etc), societal, policy and experimentation levels. In order 
to enhance further citizen science AI experiments, special prize competitions could be initiated.   
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.6: Sandbox for Trustworthy and Democratic AI
Action Code: ST6.6
Key stakeholders: Researchers (cross-discipline), policy makers, legal officers, citizens, Centres and 
entrepreneurs, public servants, public sector organisations
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
M6: Initial sandbox design 
M12: Sandbox development & launch 
M24: Initial Assessment of the first year of operations 
Links to other STs: Horizontally across all STs
Type of action: Experimentation, Trustworthy/Democratic, Empowerment
Indicative KPIs: No. of experiments, No. of Strategic Actions that utilised the sandbox services
Table 72: Information about Action ST6.6 (Sandbox for Trustworthy and Democratic AI)

9.2.7	ACTION 7: ETHICAL AND DEMOCRATIC AI TOOLKIT
Support the design and creation of a unique, 'Ethical and Democratic AI toolkit' that will support the ethical 
and democratic deployment of AI across sectors and communities. This toolkit will facilitate the 
operationalisation of the democratic AI principles (i.e., democratic ethos in AI by design) that will complement 
the European guidelines for trustworthy AI (HLEG principles/guidelines), OECD's ethical frameworks and will be 
in direct alignment with the Berlin Declaration on Digital Society 2020. This toolkit will form the basis upon 
which 'ethical and democratic by-design' certifications will be provided to the entities that adhere to these 
principles. Acting this way, as a stimulus for the adoption of AI-driven innovations that have prioritised 
democratic and trustworthy AI principles in their AI system design, testing and deployment processes.  
This AI toolkit will aim to reduce bias and discrimination, while enhancing the ethical and responsible use of AI, 
infused with the values, principles and moral ideals of democracy so as to serve as an example of a good 
practice in the EU and globally. It will be an online self-assessment tool that will be developed in 
multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary research context, utilising the AI democratisation sandbox and tested in 
AI pilot projects across-sectors (i.e., existing and upcoming AI projects). Different versions of the toolkit could 
be formed focusing on the needs of the: (a) public sector, (b) private sector, (c) research and academia. 
A specialised version of the toolkit could provide the basis upon which the development of an AI Auditing 
Framework will be developed and deployed for the needs of the AI Auditing Body. 
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.7: Ethical and Democratic AI Toolkit
Action Code: ST6.7
Key stakeholders: Researchers (cross-discipline), citizens, private sector entities, public sector entities
Duration: 24 months
Indicative Milestones: 
M10: Design and develop an early draft of the AI Toolkit
M13: Open consultation & organisation of dedicated workshops to discuss and validate the toolkit with 
experts, public and private sector representatives and citizens 
M18: Updated version of the AI Toolkit
M24: Final iterations of the AI Toolkit
Links to other STs: Horizontally across all STs
Type of action: Operational, Ethical, Democratic
Indicative KPIs: No. of toolkits 
Table 73: Information about Action ST6.7 (Ethical and Democratic AI Toolkit)

9.2.8	ACTION 8: A LABEL FOR ETHICAL AND DEMOCRATIC AI
The operationalisation of ethically sound and democratic AI applications can involve the social co-creation 
(with citizens, researcher and academia, private and public sector) of an 'Ethical and Democratic AI Label'. This 
voluntary label will act as a competitive advantage for the companies that are concerned with the 'social AI 
footprint' and want to denote their support for ethical and Democratic AI, conveying the right trust assurances 
to their customers. 
The label will be based on an index that will rate and classify AI systems, tools and applications based on their 
AI ethical and democratic level (following the example of the EU Energy Label). It will take into account, in 
addition to the legal, ethical and democratic AI components, the contextual parameters, such as the 
application context (business-to-business, business-to-consumer, etc), the sector (industrial context) and the 
associate risk, following a risk-based approach. It will have distinct acceptance levels (minimum requirements) 
depending on the AI domain (high and low risk domain), the AI application context and the current and 
potential (future) use of the system.
This rating could be a requirement before the deployment of an AI system (ex-ante) and its development will 
adopt an agile approach, constantly being monitored and updated in an anticipatory innovation perspective. 
Associated regulations could emerge in order to support the introduction of this label and pave the way for 
responsible AI innovation to be designed and developed in Greece and across the world. 
The "Label for Ethical and Democratic AI" should be standardized at EU level, in collaboration with all 
European countries. Greece aims to lay the foundations for such a standardization that could springboard from 
Greece to the world. 
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.8: A Label for Ethical and Democratic AI
Action Code: ST6.8
Key stakeholders: Researchers (cross-discipline), citizens, private sector entities, public sector entities
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
M10: Early design of the Index
M12: Open Consultations & specialised workshops to validate & enrich the proposed Index
M20: Updated and tested version of the Index 
M24: Official launch of the 'Ethical and Democratic AI Label'
Links to other STs: Horizontally across all STs
Type of action: Operational, Advisory, Ethical/Democratic
Indicative KPIs: A label classification scheme
Table 74: Information about Action ST6.8 (A Label for Ethical and Democratic AI)

9.2.9	ACTION 9: AI POLITEIA 
The AI Politeia will be a national, independent initiative. It will act as an open, multi-disciplinary think tank and 
thought leadership body that will foster a co-creation environment and establish a global dialogue around 
Artificial Intelligence, how to attain Trustworthy and Democratic AI, respecting the rights and welfare of 
humans and nature at all times. Recognizing the importance and the potential of AI, as well as the possible 
challenges and risks, the potential implications for society (impact on human rights, people's lives and our 
democratic values) and the natural environment the AI Academia will aim to foster a value-driven technology-
enabled future that embraces responsible AI innovation for the benefit of all and for the shared common 
good. 
Special emphasis will be placed on the continuum of Democracy and AI, examining this ever-evolving dynamic 
continuum of value co-creation. Examining both the: (a) Democratisation of AI and the infusion of democratic 
principles in AI-by-Design (a value-centric democratic and democratised approach to AI) as well as (b) the 
future of Democracy in an AI-saturated public sphere (Sub-action 9.1)
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.9: AI Politeia
Action Code: ST6.9
Key stakeholders: Research, Academia, civil society, private sector, public sector, policy makers & 
regulators 
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
*	M10: Initial implementation of the AI Academia with national & international members 
*	M12: Official launch of the AI Academia 
*	M16: 1st Workshop of Ethics, Democracy in the AI era
*	M24: Initial impact assessment and future steps 
Links to other STs: ST2, ST3, ST4, ST5
Type of action: Advisory, Social/Democratic/Ethical/Empowerment
Indicative KPIs: No. of national fellows, No. of international fellows, No. of papers, No. of international 
workshops
Table 75: Information about Action ST6. (AI Politeia)

9.2.9.1	SUB-ACTION 9.1: STUDY ON AI AND DEMOCRACY CONTINUUM
Create a "flagship" AI-project on the ever-evolving dynamic continuum of value co-creation between 
Democracy and AI and examine the challenges, impacts and opportunities that emerge. On the one side, we 
have the Democratisation of AI and the infusion of democratic principles in AI-by-Design centred around the 
notion of Ethos. On the other side, we have the future of Democracy in an AI-saturated public sphere, 
examining the potential impact of AI on democracy (deep fakes, manipulation of opinion, etc).
This AI-project will focus on these two areas and will study aspects related to:
*	Democratising AI. Towards a value-centric democratic and democratised approach to AI that respects and 
promotes rights, freedoms and our shared values could serve as an example of a good practice for EU and 
the world. An example towards a technology-enabled future that is guided by rights, freedoms and 
democratic values.  Taking into account the different AI trade-offs that emerge (accuracy vs. privacy, 
fairness vs. accuracy, fairness vs. privacy, explainability vs. accuracy, etc.), we should focus on our shared 
values as well 'new values' that humanity never had and which should be co-designed in a participatory 
and inclusive way, as they will guide the ongoing evolution of AI, safeguarding the wellbeing of humans 
and nature, while protecting human autonomy, rights and freedom at all times [NCSRD20].
*	AI and Democracy. Towards a new paradigm - Democracy in the era of AI - how technological 
advancements in the area of AI can evolve our shared system of fundamental rights, values and virtues. 
Democracy as a unique experimental system has the inherent potential and ability to self- correct and self-
renew. As such, the impact of technological advancements in this regeneration process will be examined, 
with the underlying aim to understand and resolve the potential conscious and unconscious decisions that 
will pave the way for an inevitable new Democratic paradigm triggered by AI and technology (Democracy 
2.0) [NCSRD20].
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.9.1: Study on AI and Democracy Continuum
Action Code: ST6.9.1
Key stakeholders: Research, academia, citizens, private sector entities, public sector entities, regulators and 
legal officers
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: N/A
Links to other STs: Horizontally across all STs
Type of action: Social, Democratic, Sustainability
Indicative KPIs: Scientific KPIs
Table 76: Information about Action ST6. (Study on AI and Democracy Continuum)

9.2.10	ACTION 10: AI FOR GREEN TRANSFORMATION & SUSTAINABLE FUTURE 
As our societies move towards a post-pandemic (COVID-19) recovery, it is important according to the United 
Nations (UN) to "build back better" by creating more sustainable, resilient and inclusive societies. This 
necessitates new holistic models for thinking about future sustainable progress and growth. Emerging 
frameworks for macroeconomic targets beyond GDP growth, such as the World Economic Forum's- Dashboard 
for a New Economy (WEF, 2020) propose dimensions such as prosperity, planet, people, and institutions, 
aligned with the UN Sustainable Development. As such, we need to adopt a future-orientated and resilience 
approach, balancing between economic, environmental, health and social targets.
Artificial Intelligence can facilitate the transition towards a more sustainable (socially, economic, natural 
sustainability) future that is socially-good-and environmentally-friendly-by-design. AI technologies should 
benefit society and the natural environment in a sustainable way. Green AI can be seen not only as a way of 
using AI in a more sustainable way but also as a way of using AI to solve the sustainability challenges. As the 
former has been addressed in the course of Strategic Target 1, in the course of this Strategic Target we place 
emphasis on the latter. 
This Strategic Action will focus on using AI to boost the Environment Performance in Various Sectors: Develop 
business cases and showcases regarding the use of AI for improving environmental performance in areas like 
manufacturing and the circular economy.
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.10: AI for Green Transformation & Sustainable Future
Action Code: ST6
Key stakeholders: Researchers, Centres and entrepreneurs & private sector, public sector, citizens, policy 
makers
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: N/A
Links to other STs: Horizontally across all STs
Type of action: Sustainability
Indicative KPIs: Environmental performance
Table 77: Information about Action ST6.10 (AI for Green Transformation & Sustainable Future)

9.2.11	ACTION 11: DEVELOP ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRUSTWORTHY AND EXPLAINABLE 
AI
To achieve trustworthiness, it is important to have a better understanding of how algorithms function and 
what choices are being made. Despite the fact that ensuring trustworthiness for AI algorithms is a daunting 
task under the current technological state-of-the-art, developers and researchers should be encouraged to 
consider trustworthiness aspects during the design and development of AI systems. For this purpose, it is 
critical to invest in multi-and-cross-disciplinary AI research that aims at resolving key issues related to the 
social impact of AI, such as fairness, transparency, explainability and value alignment, with the underlying 
focus on building trustworthy AI, that is beneficial to people and the planet and aligned to our shared 
European values of democracy, personal freedom, human dignity, solidarity, active civil society, market 
economy and rule of law. 
In practice, this objective can be achieved by channelling funding to research aspects associated with the 
various dimensions of trustworthiness, such as fairness, transparency, explainability, and the elimination of 
bias and discrimination in the algorithms' results. In particular, explainable AI, and the development of 
appropriate methodologies to measure fairness, bias and discriminatory aspects should be explicitly funded, to 
encourage research on the subject. This research effort can be conducted in partnership with related 
initiatives, such as the Global Partnership on AI (GPAI) among others. 
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.11: Develop Enabling Technologies for Trustworthy and Explainable AI
Action Code: ST6
Key stakeholders: Research, academia, private sector, Centres, public sector, policy makers
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: Addressing the problem of trustworthiness is a long-term research goal; however, 
initiating efforts towards this problem can be done immediately, through appropriate calls. Relevant 
milestones are:
M3: investigate the current state-of-the-art internationally to identify short-term and long-term scientific 
goals, and research opportunities
M9: publish first call for funding for projects related to trustworthy AI
M21: publish second call for funding for projects related to trustworthy AI
Links to other STs: ST2 (and all STs)
Type of action: Operational
Indicative KPIs: # of calls published on the subject of trustworthy AI, # of researchers working on the 
subject of trustworthy AI, total funding channelled to projects related to the subject of trustworthy AI
Table 78: Information about Action ST6.11 (Develop Enabling Technologies for Trustworthy and Explainable AI)

9.2.12	ACTION 12: PROACTIVELY DEVELOP PLANS AND POLICIES FOR THE FUTURE OF WORK 
Digitalization and globalization have sparked radical shifts in how we live and work. While no one knows what 
artificial intelligence's effect on work will exactly be, one thing is certain: it is disruptive. So far, many have cast 
that disruption in a negative light and projected a future in which AI takes jobs from human workers. 
Questions about how AI will affect the workplace are already pressing in many sectors. 
PricewaterhouseCoopers released a report that estimated that 30% of jobs in the U.K. could be replaced by 
automation within the next 15-20 years, especially jobs for less educated workers. But many concerns raised 
about AI are similar to ones from previous periods of rapid change, like the Industrial Revolution.
Another perspective is that automation may create more jobs than it displaces. AI may create new jobs, new 
lines of business that we cannot imagine now, and help people do their jobs better. By developing proactive 
plans and policies, we can shape how AI will positively affect and improve the Future of Work (FoW).
Furthermore, because of Covid-19, the vast majority of the working world is currently working remotely due to 
closings and quarantines. COVID-19 has accelerated the future of jobs, according to the Future of Jobs Report 
2020. The Future of Jobs Survey finds that 50% of employers will accelerate the automation of their work, 
while over 80% are set to expand the digitization of their work processes. That means that some jobs that have 
been lost will never come back, and those that do will require new ways of working and new skills. Most 
people have never been trained to work from home. This has likely had an impact on motivation, efficiency 
and work-life balance, creating stress and affecting physical and mental health. AI can also help solve these 
challenges and prepare us for better adapting to such situations. For example, AI can help identify 
opportunities to work better. Thanks to personalized dashboards, AI can monitor work-life balance, reduce 
stress and improve our professional behavior over time. As another example, AI can identify and automate a 
large part of the routine and time-consuming tasks, allowing us to focus on activities with higher added value, 
making them more enjoyable. AI can increase the added value of work by working closely with us. 
We need to look at ways AI can enhance how we work, rather than put jobs at risk.
Leaders will have to understand how AI will impact their workforces, then get them prepared: upskill some 
workers to do existing jobs, but with AI, and retrain and hire others for the new roles that AI will demand. By 
offering new tools for entrepreneurs, it may also create new lines of business that we cannot imagine now. 
The mix of occupations will change, as will skill and educational requirements. Work will need to be redesigned 
to ensure that humans work alongside machines most effectively, without putting work rights in peril (e.g., see 
the Amazon Mechanical Turk controversies and related legal challenges). Workers will need different skills to 
thrive in the workplace of the future. Schools will have to teach children both ICT and STEM skills and a culture 
of creativity and lifelong learning, but also empower soft skills and multi-disciplinarity to humanize this 
learning and promote citizens with a holistic view of AI. As specified in the Strategic Target 2, significant efforts 
need to be made in order to equip pupils and students with appropriate competences and retrain the 
workforce, so as to adapt to the needs of new technology and address gaps in skill sets, particularly for those 
whose jobs are most likely to be affected by automation.
This Action includes the following aspects/sub-actions:
*	Develop a study regarding the impact of AI adoption in the Greek labor market. The objectives are two-
fold: (a) to figure out which skills and jobs AI will automate, in which sector, at what time, (b) to highlight 
opportunities for AI to help the FoW (taking also in account the new, extraordinary circumstances of the 
recent pandemic).
*	Develop a roadmap for the Future of Work in Greece.
*	Deploy that roadmap through programs to upskill workforces for AI
*	Consult with institutional stakeholders (e.g., labor organizations, employers) regarding a new social 
contract that secures job positions through targeted programs for reskilling, training and lifelong learning.
*	Revise Social Security programs and introduce new instruments (e.g., UBI (Universal Basic Income)) to 
alleviate short term, adverse effects of AI in employment
*	Create the enterprise for the future of work
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.12: Proactively Develop Plans and Policies for the Future of Work
Action Code: ST6.12
Key stakeholders: Researchers (cross-discipline), citizens, private sector entities, public sector entities, 
Policy makers
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: 
M2: Formation of FoW Working group
M7: Study on the impact of AI adoption in the Greek labor market and roadmap for the Future of Work in 
Greece
M8-9: Open Consultations & specialised workshops
M9: Revised version
M12: Initial programs to upskill workforces for AI
M14: Consultation with institutional stakeholders regarding a new social contract
M24: Initial assessment of the programs
Links to other STs: Horizontally across all STs
Type of action: Legal/Regulatory, Operational
Indicative KPIs: # of companies involved in the program, # of workers trained
Table 79: Information about Action ST6.12 (Proactively Develop Plans and Policies for the Future of Work)
9.2.13	ACTION 13: AI-BASED PROJECTS IN ARTS, HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES  
The aim of this action is to support the implementation of AI-based projects with high societal and cultural 
value, even when their economic impact is limited. Therefore, it is important to proactively support AI-based 
projects in Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences, adopting an inclusive, multi-thematic and multidisciplinary 
approach to AI-funded projects. This could also include novel AI-projects (basic and applied research) that 
merge science, technology, humanities and arts contributing to social and cultural innovation, sustainability 
and inclusion. Such projects could reinforce the participatory AI dialogues with society by actively involving 
citizens as co-creators (passive, active) and ensure that technology becomes more creative, inclusive, and 
sustainable, aligned with societal needs. They would also act as means of education for the rest of society and 
projects of implicit, multidisciplinary experimentation using AI systems.
In addition, it is important to ensure that researchers and Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO) working on 
humanities, arts and social sciences, have access to the national infrastructures for AI, as well as to knowledge 
and training. 
More information about the planning of this sub-action is provided in the following table.
Action ST6.13: AI-based projects in Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences  
Action Code: ST6.13
Key stakeholders: researchers (multi-disciplinary), social scientists, artists, NGOs, civil society, academics
Duration: Phase 1: 24 months (2021-2030 horizon)
Indicative Milestones: N/A
Links to other STs: ST1, ST2, ST3
Type of action: Research, Social, Inclusive/Democratic
Indicative KPIs: No. of funded AI-projects in Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences, No. of cross and 
multidisciplinary projects
Table 80: Information about Action ST6.13 (AI-based projects in Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences)
 
10.	CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
The document presented the Hellenic National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence (AI), as developed by a 
multidisciplinary team of Greek Scientists and AI Experts under the auspices and supervision of the Ministry of 
Digital Governance. The strategy outlines the strategic targets of the country for AI development and 
adoption, along with a range of concrete projects that will boost their realization. Specifically, the overarching 
goals of the strategy are:
*	To leverage AI as a catalyst for economy growth. In this direction, the strategy plans for activities that 
foster the development of an AI-based innovation ecosystem and facilitate private sector enterprises to 
adopt, use and fully leverage AI in their business processes. Hence, the strategy's economic growth 
ambition is twofold: On the one hand it enables the demand side to take advantage of AI and on the other 
it creates an environment where innovators (including SMEs) will be able to develop and validate 
competitive AI products. National infrastructures and research initiatives are expected to play a key role in 
supporting and reinforcing the accomplishment of these economic targets.
*	To effectively integrate in the on-going digital transformation of the country.  The strategy unveils the 
potential of AI to accelerate Greece's digital transformation.  Leveraging recent digital infrastructures 
(e.g., gov.gr, G-cloud, Digital Academy, Open Data Repositories)) and policy developments (e.g., the Digital 
Bible of the country), AI could greatly boost the automation and intelligence of various public sector 
processes, while enhancing the quality of the services offered to the citizens. The strategy prescribes a rich 
set of reference projects in this direction.
*	To ensure the ethical, responsible, accessible nature of AI developments in Greece and EU, with Greece 
in active role at the EU level. The strategy presents a vision for developing and adopting AI in-line with 
European values. Moreover, it describes a set of actions that could safeguard adherence to these values, 
including technical and policy measures. The latter are destined to ensure that AI solutions and 
technologies benefit the entire Greek society without exclusion. Many of the proposed measures and 
projects towards a "democratic" AI are novel and exhibit pioneering elements. The strategy aspires to set 
Greece as one of the EU leaders and main contributors in the "democratization" of AI. In particular, it 
envisages that Greece can play a very active role in relevant technology transfer, experience sharing and 
standardization at EU level.
Building on national socio-economic priorities and specific objectives for Economic Growth, Digital 
Transformation and the strengthening of EU Values and Fundamentals Rights, the proposed Strategy 
structures the recommendations, actions, and key projects around three high level policy areas, namely:
*	Policy Area I: AI Enabling Framework 
*	Policy Area II: AI for Economic Growth and Digital Transformation
*	Policy Area III: AI Principles
These three policy areas are decomposed into six, more fine-grained, core strategic targets to be 
accomplished. This strategy additionally defines and prioritises the strategic actions that will initiate and boost 
the implementation of the strategy. Furthermore, it presents the governance framework, structure, and 
methodology to oversee the implementation of actions and assess progress towards target achievement, 
including instruments and bodies to be organised as part of the strategy and international collaboration paths. 
The timing of the strategy is very ambitious. Several projects are planned for the first two years, following the 
launch of the strategy's implementation. The latter projects include core infrastructures development (e.g., 
databases, supercomputing capacity, human capital), yet they also comprise reference projects in all areas. 
The implementation of reference projects in all envisaged areas is expected to demonstrate AI's potential in 
the Greek society and to help building trust in AI. It is acknowledged that the implementation timeline is 
ambitious. The strategy foresees the establishment of institutional teams that will closely monitor the 
implementation process and will perform regular adjustments. 
Overall, the present document represents the first release of the Strategy. The Ministry of Digital Governance 
and the team in charge of the strategy's realisation are committed to continually monitoring the 
implementation of the strategy, as a means of assessing its progress, revising its contents, and taking 
corrective actions when required. The present document is therefore the initial version of a "living" document 
that will be regularly updated subject to a continuous improvement discipline.  Overall, this strategy aspires to 
provide a sound basis for creating a vibrant AI ecosystem that will benefit the Greek Society and Economy, 
while providing a unique contribution to EU's Strategic Targets for AI, notably in terms of the EU-wide 
Democratisation of AI.


 
ABBREVIATIONS
AceIn
Athens Centre for Entrepreneurship and Innovation 
AI
Artificial Intelligence
AIDP
Artificial Intelligence Development Plan
AutoML
Automated Machine Learning
BCG
Boston Consulting Group
BI
Business Intelligence
CENELEC
European Committee for Electro technical Standardization
CIFAR
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
CIP
Critical Infrastructure Protection
CoE
Center of Excellence
CPG
Consumer Packaged Goods
CPU
Central Processing Unit
CRAs
Collaborative Research Alliances
CRADAs
Cooperative Research and Development Agreements
CS
Computer Science
CTAs
Collaborative Technical Alliances
DEI
Digitizing European Industry
DESI
Digital Economy and Society Index
DIH
Digital Innovation Hub
DL
Deep Learning
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
EC 
European Commission
EDA 
European Defence Agency
EEN
Enterprise Europe Network
EETN
Hellenic Artificial Intelligence Society
EETT
National Commission for Telecommunications and Posts
EF
Expertise France
EGG
Enter Go Grow
EIB
European Investment Bank
EIF
European Investment Fund
EFKA
National Social Security Entity 
ELSTAT
Hellenic Statistical Authority 
EOSC
European Open Science Cloud
EPAL
Vocational Senior Highschools
ESCO
 European Skills, Competences, qualifications and Occupations
ETAK
Research, Technological Development and Innovation 
EU 
European Union
EY
Ernst & Young
FCAI
Finnish Centre for Artificial Intelligence
FET
Future and Emerging Technologies
FinTech
Financial Technology
FoW
Future of Work
G-Cloud
Government Cloud
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GDPR
General Data Protection Regulation
GSISPA
General Secretariat of Information Systems of Public Administration
GIS
Geographical Information Systems
GPAI
Global Partnership on AI
GPFS
General Parallel File System`
GPS
Global Positioning System 
GPU
Graphics Processing Unit
GRNET
National Infrastructures for Research and Technology
GSRT 
General Secretariat of Research and Technology
HCMC
Hellenic Capital Market Commission
HDPA
Hellenic Data Protection Authority
HFRI
Hellenic Foundation on Research and Innovation
HEI
Higher Education Institute
HEU
Horizon Europe
HLEG
High Level Expert Group
HPC
High Performance Computing
HR
Human Resources
ICCS
Institute of Computer and Communication Systems
IP
Intellectual Property
IoT
Internet of Things
JRC
Joint Research Centre
JU
Joint Undertaking
KPI
Key Performance Indicator
LMS
Laboratory for Manufacturing Systems and Automation
ML
Machine Learning
MOOC
Massive Open On-line Course 
NCP
National Contact Point
NCSR
National Centre for Scientific Research 
NCSS
National Cyber Security Strategy
NDC
National Documentation Centre
NHS
National Healthcare System
NIS
Network and Information Systems
NIS Directive
Directive on security of network and information systems
NLP
Natural Language Processing
NLU
Natural Language Understanding 
NOAD
National Open Access Desk
NTUA
National Technical University of Athens
OAED
Hellenic Manpower Employment Organization
ODP
Open Data Portal
PACS
Picture Archiving and Communication Systems
PPP
Public-Private Partnership
RDI
Research, Development and Innovation
R&D
Research and Development
RES
Renewable Energy Sources
R&I
Research and Innovation
RL
Reinforcement Learning 
RPA
Robotic Process Automation
SEV
Hellenic Federation of Enterprises
SFBB
Superfast Broadband
STEM
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math
SWG
Stakeholders Working Group
SWOT
Strengths, Weaknesses, Threats
TEFs
Testing and Experimentation Facilities
Th.E.A.
The Athens Startup Business Incubator
UAV
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
UBI
Universal Basic Income
UARCs
University Affiliated Research Centres
USA
United States of America
USP
Unique Selling Proposition
WG
Working Group
XAI
Explainable Artificial Intelligence
5G
Fifth Generation technology standard for broadband cellular networks
 
 
REFERENCES
[Accenture19] Greece: With an AI to the Future. Accenture (2019), available at: 
https://www.accenture.com/_acnmedia/Accenture/Redesign-Assets/DotCom/Documents/Local/1/Accenture-
With-AI-to-the-Future-2019.pdf
[AIWatch2020] AI Watch, "National strategies on Artificial Intelligence", Reports available at: 
https://ec.europa.eu/knowledge4policy/ai-watch/national-strategies-artificial-
intelligence_en#ainationalstrategyreports
[Berlin20] Berlin Declaration on Digital Society and Value-Based Digital Government at the ministerial meeting 
during the German Presidency of the Council of the European Union, on 8 December 2020, available: 
https://www.bmi.bund.de/SharedDocs/downloads/EN/eu-presidency/berlin-declaration-digital-
society.pdf;jsessionid=AE23D3964120844B917D3138C421A8C3.1_cid295?__blob=publicationFile&v=2
[BCG20] Kavounides Chryssos, Markos Giakoumelos, Evdokia Kaffe, "Harnessing the Power of AI in Greece: 
Embarking on the Path to Value", Boston Consulting Group, September 2020, available: https://web-
assets.bcg.com/93/be/5ac6b7ff4d698947da09681332db/harnessing-the-power-web-final.pdf
[CIFAR20] CIFAR (2020), "Building an AI World: Report on National and Regional AI Strategies", Second edition.
[DBEIS17] Department for Business, Energy, and Industrial Strategy. Great Britain. (2017). Industrial Strategy: 
Building a Britain Fit for the Future.
[DeloitteSEV19] SEV Digital Maturity Index, Study on the Technological and Digital Maturity of the Greek 
Economy and the Greek Businesses, September 2019, available: 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/gr/Documents/technology/gr_SEV_Digital_Transformation
_Observatory_noexp.pdf
[Carayannis10] Carayannis E., and Campbell  D.,  (2010),  "Triple  Helix, Quadruple Helix and Quintuple Helix 
and how do knowledge, innovation and the environment relate to each other? A proposed framework for a 
trans-disciplinary analysis of sustainable development and social ecology", International Journal of Social 
Ecology and Sustainable Development, 1(1), pp: 41-69.
[Deloitte20] Deloitte Insights: A moral license for AI. Peter Evans-Greenwood, Rob Hanson, Sophie Goodman, 
Dennis Gentilin, 2020. https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/focus/cognitive-technologies/artificial-
intelligence-impact-on-society.html
[EC-COM(2020)65] European Commission, "On Artificial Intelligence - A European approach to excellence and 
trust" , White Paper,  COM(2020) 65 final, Brussels, 19.2.2020.
[ECValueResearch15] Value of Research Policy Paper by the Research, Innovation, and Science Policy Experts 
(2015), https://ec.europa.eu/futurium/en/system/files/ged/60_-_rise-value_of_research-june15_1.pdf
[EETN] Series of surveys on different AI Research areas in Greece by the EETN., 
https://www.eetn.gr/index.php/about-eetn/eetn-publications/ai-research-in-greece
[EURegions18] Addressing brain drain: The local and regional dimension. European Committee of the Regions 
(2018). https://cor.europa.eu/en/engage/studies/Documents/addressing-brain-drain/addressing-brain-
drain.pdf
[Frankish14] Frankish, Keith., Ramsey, William M. The Cambridge handbook of artificial intelligence. 
Cambridge, UK. 12 June 2014. ISBN 978-0-521-87142-6. OCLC 865297798.
[Gaus16] Gerald Gaus (2016). The Tyranny of the Ideal: Justice in a Diverse Society (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press). p. 162
[HLEG19] Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI (2019): https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-
market/en/news/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai
[Jaumotte05] Jaumotte, F. and Pain, N. (2005), From ideas to development: the determinants of R&D and 
patenting. OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 457, Paris: OECD. 
[Kosfeld05] Kosfeld, M.; Heinrichs, M.; Zak, P. J.; Fischbacher, U.; Fehr, E. (2005). "Oxytocin increases trust in 
humans". Nature. 435 (7042): 673-676. Bibcode:2005Natur.435..673K. doi:10.1038/nature03701. PMID 
15931222. S2CID 1234727.
[Koubarakis18] Koubarakis Manolis, George Vouros, Georgios Chalkiadakis,Vassilis Plagianakos,Christos 
Tjortjis, Ergina Kavallieratou, Dimitris Vrakas, Nikolaos Mavridis, Georgios Petasis, Konstantinos Blekas, 
Anastasia Krithara, AI in Greece: the case of research on linked geospatial data. AI Mag, 39(2), 91-96.  (2018) 
available at: https://www.ihu.edu.gr/tjortjis/Artificial%20Intelligence%20Research%20in%20Greece.pdf
[McKinsey17] Artificial Intelligence: Implications for China. New York: McKinsey Global Institute. Dominic 
Barton, Jonathan Woetzel, Jeongmin Seong, and Qinzheng Tian (2017). 
https://www.brookings.edu/research/how-artificial-intelligence-is-transforming-the-world/
[Potter02] Potter, N. N. (2002). How can i be trusted?: A virtue theory of trustworthiness. Rowman & Littlefield 
Publishers.
[Ryan20] Ryan, M. (2020). In AI We Trust: Ethics, Artificial Intelligence, and Reliability. Sci Eng Ethics 26, 2749-
2767. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-020-00228-y
[Searle80] Searle, John R. (September 1980). "Minds, brains, and programs". Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 3 
(3): 417-424. doi:10.1017/s0140525x00005756. ISSN 0140-525X
[NCSRD20] Ziouvelou X., Karkaletsis V., Giannakopoulos G., Nousias A., and Konstantopoulos S. (2020). 
"Democratising AI: A National Strategy for Greece" NCSR Demokritos White Paper, April 2020. 
  https://digitalstrategy.gov.gr/
  https://gpai.ai
  The quintuple helix innovation model [Carayannis10] integrates five subsystems (helices), academia-government-
industry-civil society-natural environment, that act as a symbiotic system between ecology, knowledge and innovation, 
creating synergies between the economy, society, and democracy [NCSRD20].
  Short term (risk assessment) - Mid/Long Term: (NCSS and regulatory amendment, infrastructure 
establishment), national capability building
  Federal Community of Practice for Crowdsourcing and Citizen Science. www.citizenscience.gov/
  The notion of democratic AI by design is presented in Chapter 3 of this report. 
